Pursuing Happiness: The Architecture of Sustainable Change Sonja Lyubomirsky University of California, Riverside Kennon M. Sheldon University of Missouri—Columbia David Schkade University of California, San Diego The pursuit of happiness is an important goal for many people. However, surprisingly little scientific research has focused on the question of how happiness can be increased and then sustained, probably because of pessimism engendered by the concepts of genetic determinism and hedonic adaptation. Nevertheless, emerging sources of opti- mism exist regarding the possibility of permanent increases in happiness. Drawing on the past well-being literature, the authors propose that a person’s chronic happiness level is governed by 3 major factors: a genetically determined set point for happiness, happiness-relevant circumstantial factors, and happiness-relevant activities and prac- tices. The authors then consider adaptation and dynamic processes to show why the activity category offers the best opportunities for sustainably increasing happiness. Finally, existing research is discussed in support of the model, including 2 preliminary happiness-increasing interventions. The pursuit of happiness holds an honored position in American society, beginning with the Declaration of Independence, where it is promised as a cherished right for all citizens. Today, the enduring U.S. obsession with how to be happy can be observed in the row upon row of popular psychology and self-help books in any major bookstore and in the millions of copies of these books that are sold. Indeed, many social contexts in the United States have the production of happiness and positive feel- ings as their primary purpose, and questions such as “Are you happy?” and “Are you having fun?” fit nearly every occasion (Markus & Kitayama, 1994). Not surprisingly, the majority of U.S. residents rate personal happiness as very important (Diener, Suh, Smith, & Shao, 1995; Triandis, Bontempo, Leung, & Hui, 1990) and report thinking about happiness at least once every day (Freedman, 1978). Furthermore, the pursuit of happiness is no longer just a North American obsession, but instead it is becoming ever more global as people seek to fulfill the promises of capitalism and political freedom (Diener et al., 1995; Freedman, 1978; Triandis et al., 1990). It seems that nearly all people believe, or would like to believe, that they can move in an “upward spiral” (Sheldon & Houser- Marko, 2001) toward ever greater personal well-being. Is the pursuit of happiness merely a bourgeois concern, a symptom of Western comfort and self-centeredness, a factor that has no real im- pact on psychological adjustment and adapta- tion? The empirical evidence suggests that this is not the case. Indeed, a number of researchers and thinkers have argued that the ability to be happy and contented with life is a central crite- rion of adaptation and positive mental health (e.g., Diener, 1984; Jahoda, 1958; Taylor & Brown, 1988). Bolstering this notion, Ly- ubomirsky and her colleagues recently com- Sonja Lyubomirsky, Department of Psychology, Univer- sity of California, Riverside; Kennon M. Sheldon, Depart- ment of Psychology, University of Missouri—Columbia; David Schkade, Rady School of Management, University of California, San Diego. This work was supported in part by grants from the Positive Psychology Network. We are grateful to Linda Houser-Marko, Kathleen Jamir, and Chris Tkach for con- ducting library research and to Shelley Taylor, David Sher- man, and the other members of Psychology 421 for valuable comments on a draft. Correspondence concerning this article should be ad- dressed to Sonja Lyubomirsky, Department of Psychology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, or Kennon M. Sheldon, Department of Psychological Sciences, 112 McAlester Hall, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211. E-mail: sonja@citrus.ucr.edu or sheldonk@missouri .edu Review of General Psychology Copyright 2005 by the Educational Publishing Foundation 2005, Vol. 9, No. 2, 111–131 1089-2680/05/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/1089-2680.9.2.111 111 piled evidence showing that happiness has nu- merous positive byproducts that appear to ben- efit individuals, families, and communities (Lyubomirsky, King, & Diener, 2004; see also Fredrickson, 2001). Furthermore, Lyubomirsky et al.’s analysis revealed that happy people gain tangible benefits in many different life domains from their positive state of mind, including larger social rewards (higher odds of marriage and lower odds of divorce, more friends, stron- ger social support, and richer social interac- tions; e.g., Harker & Keltner, 2001; Marks & Fleming, 1999; Okun, Stock, Haring, & Witter, 1984), superior work outcomes (greater creativ- ity, increased productivity, higher quality of work, and higher income; e.g., Estrada, Isen, & Young, 1994; Staw, Sutton, & Pelled, 1995), and more activity, energy, and flow (e.g., Csik- szentmihalyi & Wong, 1991). Further supporting the argument that subjec- tive happiness may be integral to mental and physical health, happy people are more likely to evidence greater self-control and self-regulatory and coping abilities (e.g., Aspinwall, 1998; Fredrickson & Joiner, 2002; Keltner & Bon- anno, 1997), to have a bolstered immune system (e.g., Dillon, Minchoff, & Baker, 1985; Stone et al., 1994), and even to live a longer life (e.g., Danner, Snowdon, & Friesen, 2001; Ostir, Markides, Black, & Goodwin, 2000). Also, happy people are not just self-centered or self- ish; the literature suggests that happy individu- als instead tend to be relatively more coopera- tive, prosocial, charitable, and “other-centered” (e.g., Isen, 1970; Kasser & Ryan, 1996; Wil- liams & Shiaw, 1999). In summary, happy individuals appear more likely to be flourishing people, both inwardly and outwardly. Thus, we argue that enhancing people’s happiness levels may indeed be a wor- thy scientific goal, especially after their basic physical and security needs are met. Unfortu- nately, however, relatively little scientific sup- port exists for the idea that people’s happiness levels can change for the better. For example, the happiness-boosting techniques proposed in the self-help literature generally have limited grounding in scientific theory and even less empirical confirmation of their effectiveness (Norcross et al., 2000). Consider a representa- tive best seller, You Can Be Happy No Matter What: Five Principles for Keeping Life in Per- spective, by Carlson (1997). Do the five princi- ples work? Do some work better than others? Do the principles work better for some people than for others? Are any positive effects of the principles due, ultimately, to placebo effects? If the book actually helps people “get happier,” does the happiness boost last? Although it is possible that some of the advice given in this and other similar books could well be appropri- ate and effective, the authors provide almost no empirical research in support of their claims. One receives little more guidance from con- temporary academic psychology. Of course, re- search psychologists have identified many pre- dictors of people’s happiness or subjective well- being. For example, well-being has been shown to be associated with a wide variety of factors, including demographic status (e.g., Argyle, 1999; Diener, Suh, Lucas, & Smith, 1999; My- ers, 2000), personality traits and attitudes (e.g., Diener & Lucas, 1999), and goal characteristics (e.g., McGregor & Little, 1998). However, a limitation of previous research is that the vast majority of studies have been cross sectional and have reported between-subjects effects rather than investigating well-being longitudi- nally and examining within-subject effects. In addition, very few happiness intervention stud- ies have been conducted. Thus, researchers still know surprisingly little about how to change well-being, that is, about the possibility of “be- coming happier.” Doubtless, part of the reason for this neglect is the difficulty of conducting longitudinal and intervention studies. The prob- lem is further compounded by the tendency of applied mental health researchers to focus on pathology rather than on positive mental health (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000) and by the thorny issues raised when theorists speculate on how people “should” live their lives to max- imize their potential for happiness (Schwartz, 2000). However, we believe the principal rea- son for the neglect of this question is the con- siderable scientific pessimism over whether it is even possible to effect sustainable increases in happiness. Historical Sources of Pessimism Three considerations serve to illustrate the depth of this pessimism. First is the idea of a genetically determined set point (or set range) for happiness. Lykken and Tellegen (1996) have provided evidence, based on twin studies 112 LYUBOMIRSKY, SHELDON, AND SCHKADE and adoption studies, that the heritability of well-being may be as high as 80% (although a more widely accepted figure is 50%; Braungart, Plomin, DeFries, & Fulker, 1992; Tellegen et al., 1988; cf. Diener et al., 1999). Whatever the exact coefficient, its large magnitude suggests that for each person there is indeed a chronic or characteristic level of happiness. Consistent with this idea, Headey and Wearing (1989) found, in a four-wave panel study, that partici- pants tended to keep returning to their own baselines over time (see also Suh, Diener, & Fujita, 1996). Thus, although there may be sub- stantial variation around this baseline level in the short term, in the long term people perhaps cannot help but return to their set point, or to the middle of their set range: “What goes up must come down” (a more detailed description of the happiness set point is provided later). A second and closely related source of pes- simism comes from the literature on personality traits. Traits are cognitive, affective, and behav- ioral complexes that are, by definition, consis- tent across situations and across the life span and therefore may account for part of the sta- bility of the set point. In support of the latter assumption, McCrae and Costa (1990) have shown impressive long-term stability for the “Big Five” traits, including the two traits most closely related to well-being: neuroticism and extraversion. Specifically, people tend to main- tain the same rank ordering in their levels of worry, rumination, and guilt, as well as in their levels of social engagement, enthusiasm, and self-confidence. Because of the close relation between psychological well-being and these personality characteristics, McCrae and Costa argued that people also tend to maintain the same relative level of happiness over time (see also Costa, McCrae, & Zonderman, 1987; Die- ner & Lucas, 1999). A third source of pessimism arises from the concept of the hedonic treadmill (Brickman & Campbell, 1971), which suggests that any gains in happiness are only temporary, because hu- mans so quickly adapt to change (see also Kah- neman, 1999; Tversky & Griffin, 1991). Thus, although new circumstances may temporarily cause people to become happier or sadder, they rapidly adjust, and the effect of these new cir- cumstances on happiness then diminishes quickly or even disappears entirely. For exam- ple, Brickman, Coates, and Janoff-Bulman (1978) showed that, after 1 year, lottery winners were no happier than controls, and furthermore recent paralysis victims were not as unhappy as one would expect. Further evidence of hedonic adaptation comes from findings of remarkably small correlations between happiness and wealth (Diener & Lucas, 1999) and Myers’s (2000) observation that while U.S. citizens’ per- sonal income has more than doubled in the past 50 years, their happiness levels have re- mained the same. The notion of an individual fighting against the effects of adaptation brings to mind an image of a pedestrian walking up a descending escalator. Although the improving circumstances of her life may propel her upward toward ever greater happiness, the process of adaptation forces her back to her initial state. Together, these concepts and findings suggest that trying to become happier may be as futile as trying to become taller (Lykken & Tellegen, 1996). Indeed, some have argued that pursuing happiness may backfire altogether, if the pursuit becomes a conscious “extrinsic” goal that dis- tracts people from enjoying the moment (Schooler, Ariely, & Loewenstein, in press; see also Sheldon, 2004). Moreover, striving for happiness may inevitably result in deep disap- pointment for many people. From this perspec- tive, rather than seeking an upward spiral, maybe people would be better off simply ac- cepting their current personality and happiness levels (McCrae & Costa, 1994). In Zen terms, perhaps one should try to transcend the pursuit of happiness rather than trying to maximize it (Gaskins, 1999). Indeed, a number of philo- sophical traditions embrace the notion that hap- piness should not be increased beyond an ideal level, one akin to a “Golden Mean” (Aristotle, 1974) between agony and ecstasy. To be sure, most people would undoubtedly reject an unre- strained, ceaseless pursuit of well-being. Present Sources of Optimism Is the pursuit of happiness futile? We believe not. Despite the seemingly compelling reasons we have listed for pessimism regarding attempts to elevate levels of well-being, there are also compelling reasons for optimism. In the follow- ing, we briefly describe four sources of opti- mism, returning to consider some of them in greater detail later. First, some researchers have had success, albeit limited and short term, in 113SPECIAL ISSUE: ARCHITECTURE OF SUSTAINABLE HAPPINESS using interventions to increase happiness (e.g., Fava, 1999; Fordyce, 1977, 1983, Lichter, Haye, & Kammann, 1980; Sheldon, Kasser, Smith, & Share, 2002). The potential of happi- ness-enhancing interventions is further reflected in emerging research in the positive psychology tradition demonstrating that practicing certain virtues, such as gratitude (Emmons & McCul- lough, 2003), forgiveness (McCullough, Parga- ment, & Thoresen, 2000), and thoughtful self- reflection (King, 2001; Lyubomirsky, Sousa, & Dickerhoof, 2004), can bring about enhanced well-being. Furthermore, research documenting the long-term effectiveness of cognitive and behavioral strategies to combat negative affect and depression has encouraging implications for the possibility of elevating long-term happi- ness (e.g., Gloaguen, Cottraux, Cucherat, & Blackburn, 1998; Jacobson et al., 1996). Second, many different motivational and at- titudinal factors have been linked to well-being, factors that are presumably amenable to some volitional control. Examples of possible moti- vational factors include the successful pursuit of life goals that are intrinsic in content (e.g., Kasser & Ryan, 1996); concordant with a per- son’s interests, motives, and values (Brunstein, Schultheiss, & Grassman, 1998; Sheldon & El- liot, 1999; Sheldon & Kasser, 1995); and inter- nally consistent (e.g., Emmons & King, 1988; Sheldon & Kasser, 1995). Examples of poten- tially controllable attitudinal factors include the tendency to take an optimistic perspective on one’s life situations (e.g., DeNeve & Cooper, 1998; McCrae & Costa, 1986), the inclination to avoid social comparisons and contingent self- evaluations (e.g., Lyubomirsky & Ross, 1997), and the tendency to feel a sense of optimism or efficacy regarding one’s life (Bandura, 1997; Scheier & Carver, 1993; Seligman, 1991; Tay- lor & Brown, 1988). A third reason for optimism is provided by recent findings that older people tend to be somewhat happier than younger people (Charles, Reynolds, & Gatz, 2001; Diener & Suh, 1998; Roberts & Chapman, 2000; Sheldon & Kasser, 2001). Specifically, both cross-sec- tional and longitudinal work has shown that older persons report higher life satisfaction and lower negative affect. Although these main ef- fects do not always emerge, they are observed frequently enough to suggest that greater hap- piness can indeed be achieved over time, not just by a few people but perhaps by the majority of people. Indeed, Carstensen’s (1995) socio- emotional selectivity theory suggests that older people learn to structure their lives and pursue particular goals that maximize positive emo- tions, consistent with the proposal that people can learn to sustainably increase their well- being. Further supporting this notion are Shel- don and Kasser’s (2001) results, which showed that age-related increases in well-being are in part mediated by volitional changes, including older people’s ability to select more enjoyable and self-appropriate goals. Yet another reason why genes are not neces- sarily destiny is that they appear to influence happiness indirectly, that is, by influencing the kinds of experiences and environments one has or seeks to have. Thus, unwanted effects of genes could be minimized by active efforts to steer oneself away from situations that detract from well-being or by avoiding being enticed toward maladaptive behaviors (Lykken, 2000; Lyubomirsky, 2001). In addition, it is worth noting that heritability coefficients describe co- variations, not mean levels. Furthermore, even a high heritability coefficient for a particular trait (such as happiness) does not rule out the possi- bility that the mean level of that trait for a specific population can be raised. Under the right conditions, perhaps anyone can become happier, even if her or his rank ordering relative to others remains stable. To summarize, it appears there is a paradox: Some theoretical perspectives and empirical data suggest that happiness can be increased, whereas other theories and data imply that it cannot. How can these conflicting perspectives on the possibility of happiness enhancement be resolved? Also, if enhanced happiness is indeed possible, what kinds of circumstances, activi- ties, or habits of mind are most likely to bring gains, especially gains that can be maintained? Model of Happiness Accordingly, the primary question addressed in this article is the following: Through what mechanisms, if any, can a chronic happiness level higher than the set point be achieved and sustained? To this end, we describe the archi- tecture of sustainable happiness. The integra- tive model of happiness we present accommo- dates the role of both personality/genetic and 114 LYUBOMIRSKY, SHELDON, AND SCHKADE circumstantial/demographic factors in happi- ness. However, it also goes beyond these cross- sectional or concurrent factors to incorporate dynamic, time-sensitive factors. This extension allows the question of within-subject change in well-being, and maintained change, to be ad- dressed. Most important, the model incorpo- rates the role of motivational and attitudinal factors, consistent with the assumption that hap- piness can be actively pursued. We attempt to show that certain types of intentional activities indeed offer ways to achieve sustainable changes in well-being, despite the counteracting effects of adaptation. In the sections to follow, we first provide a working definition of chronic happiness. Then we define the three factors that affect it (genetic set point, circumstances, and activities) and ar- gue that intentional activities offer the best po- tential route to higher and sustainable levels of happiness. Subsequently, we consider some more complex issues pertaining to the achieve- ment of sustainable well-being via intentional activity, such as the role of person–activity fit, optimal timing and variety of activity, and the supportive role of sustained effort and posi- tive habits. Then, in the final section of the article, we describe several preliminary efforts to increase happiness, based on our model, and discuss the nature of effective happiness interventions. Defining Happiness Here we define happiness as it is most often defined in the literature, that is, in terms of frequent positive affect, high life satisfaction, and infrequent negative affect. These three con- structs are the three primary components of subjective well-being, according to Diener and colleagues (for reviews, see Diener, 1984, 1994; Diener et al., 1999). Supporting the legitimacy of considering them as indicators of the same underlying construct, we find that the measures are highly correlated and typically yield a single factor after negative affect has been recoded (Sheldon & Kasser, 1998, 2001; Sheldon & Lyubomirsky, 2004). To refer to this group of measures, we use the term happiness or subjec- tive well-being, although we also discuss mood and life satisfaction at times according to the specific ideas and data being presented. It is important to note as well that we use a subjectivist definition of happiness, one that commonly relies on people’s self-reports. We believe this is appropriate and even necessary given our view that happiness must be defined from the perspective of the person. In other words, happiness is primarily a subjective phe- nomenon for which the final judge should be “whoever lives inside a person’s skin” (Myers & Diener, 1995, p. 11; see also Diener, 1994). However, the fact that the judgment of happi- ness is necessarily subjective does not mean that influences on that judgment cannot be studied empirically; for example, researchers might in- vestigate the effects of factors such as a per- son’s recent experiences of positive emotion (Frijda, 1999), the frame in which the question is presented (Larsen & Fredrickson, 1999), the meaning that the person ascribes to the question (Schwarz & Strack, 1999), and the person’s sense of making satisfactory progress toward life goals at the time of the judgment (Carver & Scheier, 1990). We consider some of these fac- tors in greater detail in a later section. Finally, the fact that self-reported happiness is subjec- tive does not mean that it is unrelated to rela- tively more “objective” variables. For example, research has shown significant convergence of self-reported well-being with peer and spouse reports of well-being (e.g., Lyubomirsky & Lepper, 1999; Sandvik, Diener, & Seidlitz, 1993), with recall of particular types of events (e.g., Seidlitz, Wyer, & Diener, 1997), with smiling behavior (e.g., Harker & Keltner, 2001), and with physiological responses (e.g., Lerner, Taylor, Gonzalez, & Stayn, 2002). Chronic Happiness Level Our primary focus in this article is on a person’s characteristic level of happiness during a particular period in his or her life, which we term the chronic happiness level. We define happiness this way because we wish to identify a quantity that is more enduring than momen- tary or daily happiness but that is also somewhat malleable over time and, thus, amenable to meaningful pursuit. According to this defini- tion, although it is possible to alter one’s chronic happiness level, it is much more diffi- cult to do so than to alter one’s happiness level at a particular moment or on a particular day. Operationally, one might define a person’s 115SPECIAL ISSUE: ARCHITECTURE OF SUSTAINABLE HAPPINESS chronic happiness level in terms of his or her retrospective summary judgments regarding his or her mood and satisfaction during some recent period (such as the past 2, 6, or 12 months) or as the average of momentary judgments of mood and satisfaction made at several times during the selected period. It is worth adding, however, that people may vary in their “hedonic profiles,” such that two individuals with similar chronic happiness levels might differ in their relative levels of contentment with life versus their rel- ative frequency of experiencing positive and negative mood states. Determinants of the Chronic Happiness Level We focus on three primary types of factors that we believe causally affect the chronic hap- piness level, namely, the set point, life circum- stances, and intentional activity. We focus on these three factors because they have histori- cally received the majority of attention in the well-being literature, providing a substantial re- search base. We also focus on this three-factor distinction because it allows us to address sev- eral important issues and paradoxes, such as the question of whether it is even possible to “be- come happier” given strong genetic influences on happiness, the question of why past well- being research has revealed such weak associ- ations between demographic/circumstantial variables and happiness, and the question of how a person might appropriately take action to “pursue” happiness. Figure 1 provides an illustration of the ap- proximate percentage of the variance that each of the three factors accounts for in cross-sec- tional well-being, as suggested by past research. As can be seen in the pie chart, existing evi- dence suggests that genetics account for approx- imately 50% of the population variation (Braun- gart et al., 1992; Lykken & Tellegen, 1996; Tellegen et al., 1988), and circumstances ac- count for approximately 10% (Argyle, 1999; Diener et al., 1999). This leaves as much as 40% of the variance for intentional activity, supporting our proposal that volitional efforts offer a promising possible route to longitudinal increases in happiness. In other words, changing one’s intentional activities may provide a hap- piness-boosting potential that is at least as large as, and probably much larger than, changing one’s circumstances. In the following, we pro- vide a definition of each factor, briefly consider whether and how changing that factor can lead to changes in people’s chronic well-being, and discuss whether such changes may be sustain- able over the long term, that is, whether the forces of hedonic adaptation can be counter- acted by that factor. Happiness Set Point We assume that an individual’s chronic hap- piness level is in part determined by her or his set point, which is defined as the central or expected value within the person’s set range. The happiness set point is genetically deter- mined and is assumed to be fixed, stable over time, and immune to influence or control. Con- sistent with this assumption, twin studies (Lykken & Tellegen, 1996; Tellegen et al., 1988), long-term panel studies (Headey & Wearing, 1989), and studies of the effects of life events on well-being (Brickman et al., 1978) all indicate substantial long-term stability in hap- piness. For example, Lykken and Tellegen (1996) assessed well-being in twins at 20 years of age and then again at 30 years of age. The test–retest correlation was a considerable .50. Even more important, the cross-twin, cross-time correlation for the happiness of monozygotic twins was .40 (or 80% of the test–retest corre- lation), suggesting that the heritability of the “stable” component of happiness is approxi- mately .80. In contrast, the cross-twin, cross- time correlation for dizygotic twins was close to zero (.07). Other studies, although differing in Figure 1. Three primary factors influencing the chronic happiness level. 116 LYUBOMIRSKY, SHELDON, AND SCHKADE their estimates of heritability, have consistently shown that monozygotic twins exhibit consid- erably more similar patterns of happiness change than do dizygotic twins, providing con- verging support that the variance in adult hap- piness is in large part determined genetically. The set point probably reflects relatively im- mutable intrapersonal, temperamental, and af- fective personality traits, such as extraversion, arousability, and negative affectivity, that are rooted in neurobiology (e.g., Ashby, Isen, & Turken, 1999; Davidson, 1999; Depue & Col- lins, 1999; Gray, 1990; Kagan, 2003; Robinson, Emde, & Corley, 2001), are highly heritable (Tellegen et al., 1988), and change little over the life span (McCrae & Costa, 1990). For ex- ample, Kagan has followed children from 4 months to 11 years of age and shown that so- ciability in 11-year olds can be traced to a particular type of infant temperament (called “low reactive”) that appears to involve a distinct neurochemical profile. Other writers, including Gray and Depue, have also compiled persuasive evidence for the neurobiological underpinnings of personality. This rapidly growing body of research supports the set point theory of person- ality and affect. Implications of the Set Point for Sustainable Increases in Chronic Happiness The preceding analysis implies that one’s chronic happiness during a particular life period can be increased, but not by changing one’s set point, because by definition it is constant. In other words, although it is possible that future scientists will learn how to alter people’s basic temperaments and dispositions, at present it ap- pears that focusing on the set point is not a fruitful avenue for happiness increase. Again, however, one can posit that nongenetic factors also influence a person’s chronic happiness level, helping to determine whether the person falls in the lower or upper portion of his or her potential range at a particular time. The remain- ing variables in the model are designed to rep- resent these other factors. Circumstances This category consists of happiness-relevant circumstantial factors, that is, the incidental but relatively stable facts of an individual’s life. Happiness-relevant circumstances may include the national, geographical, and cultural region in which a person resides, as well as demo- graphic factors such as age, gender, and ethnic- ity (see Diener et al., 1999, for a review). Cir- cumstantial factors also include the individual’s personal history, that is, life events that can affect his or her happiness, such as having ex- perienced a childhood trauma, being involved in an automobile accident, or winning a presti- gious award. Finally, circumstantial factors in- clude life status variables such as marital status, occupational status, job security, income, health, and religious affiliation. Again, previous cross-sectional research has linked all of the circumstantial factors just de- scribed to subjective well-being (Diener et al., 1999). For example, empirical evidence shows that people who are paid more are relatively happier (e.g., Diener, Sandvik, Seidlitz, & Die- ner, 1993) and that middle-class individuals are somewhat happier than working-class individu- als (e.g., Warr & Payne, 1982). Married people are happier than those who are single, divorced, or widowed (e.g., Mastekaasa, 1994), even in cultures as diverse as those of Belarus and Spain (Diener, Gohm, Suh, & Oishi, 2000). Findings also reveal that religiously committed people are relatively more likely to rate themselves as “very happy” (Gallup, 1984) and that, not sur- prisingly, healthy people, especially older ones, declare themselves to be slightly happier than sick people (e.g., Okun et al., 1984). However, as suggested earlier, all circum- stances combined account for only 8% to 15% of the variance in happiness levels (Argyle, 1999; Diener et al., 1999). These relatively weak associations have been deemed surprising and paradoxical, given well-being researchers’ initial expectations that circumstantial factors such as income and physical health would be strongly related to happiness (Diener et al., 1999). We believe that these counterintuitively small effects can be largely accounted for by hedonic adaptation and the fact that people adapt rapidly to new circumstances and life events. This appears to be the case because adaptation—whether it is sensory (e.g., to a foul odor or a heavy weight; Brown, 1953), physio- logical (e.g., to very hot or cold temperatures; Dar, Ariely, & Frank, 1995), or hedonic (e.g., to a salary raise; Brickman et al., 1978; Parducci, 117SPECIAL ISSUE: ARCHITECTURE OF SUSTAINABLE HAPPINESS 1995)—occurs in response to stimuli that are constant or repeated. By definition, constancy is a feature of most circumstantial changes. Implications of Circumstances for Sustainable Increases in Chronic Happiness Of the different types of circumstances, life status variables in particular seem to offer some potential for increasing chronic happiness, in that individuals often have considerable control over them. For example, a college football player may sign a lucrative NFL contract, a middle-aged divorcee may remarry, or a retired couple may move to Florida to a condominium with a view, all becoming happier as a result. Will such new happiness last, however? Per- haps not, because, as mentioned earlier, hedonic adaptation tends to shuttle people back to their starting point following any positive circum- stantial change. For example, Headey and Wearing (1989) found in their four-wave panel study that positive and negative events (e.g., “made lots of new friends,” “got married,” “ex- perienced serious problems with children,” or “became unemployed”) influenced life satisfac- tion, positive affect, and negative affect as would be expected but that people kept return- ing to their original baselines. And Schkade and Kahneman (1998) revealed that although “liv- ing in California” is a seductive notion for many, it does not actually make people any happier in the long run. Furthermore, Lucas, Clark, Georgellis, and Diener (2003) showed that, for most people, the life satisfaction ben- efits derived from getting married tended to fade over the years. Thus, although one may gain a temporary “boost” by moving to a new region, increasing one’s income level, or changing one’s appearance, such boosts will probably not last, because people tend to adapt to constant circumstances. Other reasons why circumstan- tial changes may prove ineffectual for perma- nently increasing happiness include the fact that circumstantial changes can be costly (e.g., in terms of money, resources, and time) and, in many cases, impractical or even impossible. Also, once a realistic “ceiling” of positive cir- cumstances is reached, it may be difficult to improve matters further. In short, the data suggest that changes in circumstances have limited potential for pro- ducing sustainable changes in chronic happi- ness. Although this strategy may work in the short term, it probably will not work in the long term. Of course, if people have not achieved basic subsistence and security, then it is logical for them to attend to these circumstances and basic needs first, before focusing on maximiz- ing their happiness. However, we assume that, at best, satisfying basic needs can move people only up to their set point, not beyond. Intentional Activity Now we turn to the third and arguably most promising means of altering one’s happiness level: intentional activity. This is a very broad category that includes the wide variety of things that people do and think in their daily lives. Obviously, humans are very active creatures, with innumerable behaviors, projects, and con- cerns to which they devote energy. By “inten- tional,” we mean discrete actions or practices in which people can choose to engage (although the choice to initiate the activity may have be- come habitual, as discussed in a later section). We also assume that intentional activities re- quire some degree of effort to enact. That is, the person has to try to do the activity; it does not happen by itself. Indeed, this point touches on one of the critical distinctions between the cat- egory of activity and the category of life cir- cumstances; that is, circumstances happen to people, and activities are ways that people act on their circumstances. There is good reason to believe that inten- tional activity can influence well-being. For ex- ample, some types of behavioral activity, such as exercising regularly or trying to be kind to others, are associated with well-being (e.g., Keltner & Bonanno, 1997; Magen & Aharoni, 1991), as are some types of cognitive activity, such as reframing situations in a more positive light or pausing to count one’s blessings (Em- mons & McCullough, 2003; King, 2001; Selig- man, 1991), and some kinds of volitional activ- ity, such as striving for important personal goals (Sheldon & Houser-Marko, 2001) or devoting effort to meaningful causes (M. Snyder & Omoto, 2001). Notably, it is impossible to fully separate behavioral, cognitive, and volitional activity; still, we believe the distinction is use- ful, and we continue to use it throughout the article. 118 LYUBOMIRSKY, SHELDON, AND SCHKADE Implications of Intentional Activity for Sustainable Increases in Chronic Happiness Again, it appears that increasing one’s set point and changing one’s life circumstances are not fruitful avenues for sustainable increases in chronic happiness. What, if anything, can pro- vide such an avenue? In the following, we argue that intentional behavioral, cognitive, or voli- tional activity offers the best potential route. Some work has already investigated the impact of adopting new behaviors on longitudinal well- being, showing, for example, that faithfully en- gaging in a new exercise program positively boosts people’s mood and vitality and can even maintain the boosts for as long as 6 months (e.g., Ransford & Palisi, 1996; Stewart et al., 1997). Although little work has directly inves- tigated the longitudinal effects of changing one’s cognitive attitudes and practices on en- hanced well-being, the general success of cog- nitive–behavioral therapy in reducing suffering (Gloaguen et al., 1998) and recent work indi- cating positive effects of prompting people to practice positive psychological “virtues” such as gratitude (Emmons & McCullough, 2003), hope (C. R. Snyder, Ilardi, Michael, & Cheav- ens, 2000), and forgiveness (McCullough et al., 2000) suggest that cognitive activity offers many excellent possibilities for happiness inter- ventions (Fordyce, 1983). Turning to the third type of intentional activ- ity, recent longitudinal studies have focused specifically on volitional activity as a producer of enhanced well-being (see Sheldon, 2002, for a review). In such studies, students are typically asked to pursue self-generated personal goals over the course of a semester. High levels of goal progress or attainment consistently predict increased well-being (i.e., higher positive affect and life satisfaction and lower negative mood) from the beginning to the end of the semester, whereas low levels of progress predict reduced well-being (Brunstein, 1993; Sheldon, 2002). Specifically, Sheldon’s longitudinal research in this area (Sheldon & Elliot, 1998, 1999; Shel- don & Kasser, 1995, 1998) has shown that well-being increases are most likely when a person chooses and attains self-concordant goals, that is, goals that “fit” the person (as described subsequently). This work has also highlighted one potential mediator from suc- cessful volitional activity to enhanced well-be- ing, namely, accumulations of positive daily experiences along the way. The question of what other proximal factors may mediate changes in chronic happiness is addressed in more detail in a later section. Notably, these studies do not extend beyond a single span of time. Thus, they do not directly address the crucial question raised by the cur- rent article: whether gains in well-being last. Although Headey and Wearing’s important (1989) work suggests that gains in happiness do not last, notably, their study focused only on life events (“circumstances,” in our model) and did not take intentional activity into direct account. Recently, Sheldon and Houser-Marko (2001) addressed the question of sustainability by ex- amining the effects of goal attainment on emo- tional well-being over two consecutive semes- ters. Consistent with earlier studies, they found that students who attained their personal goals during the first semester of their freshman year experienced enhanced adjustment and emo- tional well-being at the end of that semester. More important, they found that students could maintain their enhanced level of well-being, but only if they continued to do well at their goals during the second semester. In contrast, stu- dents who did well in the first semester but not in the second semester tended to regress back to their original well-being levels. This study of- fers direct support for our assumption that hap- piness can be enhanced and then maintained at the new level, especially when volitional activ- ity is effectively pursued over long periods of time. Further supporting this conclusion, Shel- don and Lyubomirsky (2004) recently resur- veyed these participants 3 years after the origi- nal study and found that initially high-perform- ing students had maintained their earlier gains in emotional well-being throughout their col- lege career. But what about adaptation? Is it not the case that even the most successful striver adapts to his or her happy situation eventually? More generally, is it not the case that people ulti- mately adapt to the positive effects of any ac- tivity in which they engage, whether it be be- havioral, cognitive, or volitional, so that the activity loses its potency over time? Although hedonic adaptation undoubtedly constrains the happiness-inducing effects of in- 119SPECIAL ISSUE: ARCHITECTURE OF SUSTAINABLE HAPPINESS tentional activities, just as it does for circum- stances, this adaptation effect appears to be weaker in the case of activity, as shown by recent data. For example, Sheldon and Ly- ubomirsky (2004) recently conducted several short-term longitudinal studies in which partic- ipants’ well-being (positive affect, negative af- fect, and life satisfaction) was measured at Time 1, and positive circumstantial and activ- ity-based life changes were measured at Time 2. Well-being was then measured twice more, at Times 3 and 4. These investigators found con- sistent support for a path model, displayed in Figure 2, in which both positive circumstantial change and positive activity change predicted enhanced life satisfaction and positive affect at Time 3, but only positive activity change pre- dicted maintained happiness gains at Time 4, with positive circumstantial change dropping out of the model. In other words, consistent with the present model, only activity-based well-be- ing change lasted; circumstance-based happi- ness change did not. In a separate study, Sheldon and Lyubomir- sky (2004) randomly assigned participants to report on either activity-based positive changes or circumstantially based positive changes in their lives. Relative to those in the circumstan- tial-change group, those in the activity-change group reported a weaker sense of “having gotten used to the change, such that it does not give the same boost as before,” and more strongly en- dorsed the statement “the change is something that varies over time, that is, something that adds variety to my life.” These findings further support the claim that activity changes are char- acterized by less hedonic adaptation than cir- cumstantial changes. Parenthetically, Sheldon and Lyubomirsky’s (2004) findings, taken as a whole, support the validity of our distinction between circumstantial changes and activity changes. Although the boundaries between these categories can be fuzzy, apparently they are clear enough to produce the predicted effects. Specific Advantages of Intentional Activity What are the sources of the sustainable hap- piness gains afforded by intentional activity? We posit that activity-based change, unlike cir- cumstance-based change, has several desirable features that may help to combat adaptation. Intentional activity is episodic. One feature of activities is that they are, by definition, epi- sodic and transient; after all, people cannot spend all of their time doing one thing. This in itself suggests that individuals may adapt less readily to new activities than to new circum- stances. The episodic nature of activity also suggests that an additional way to maximize the impact of an activity is to attend to the timing of that activity. For example, a person might choose to “count her blessings” only after brav- ing a difficult period, or only when she is espe- cially needful of a boost. Suppose instead that she counts the same blessings every day, in a nonvarying routine. This person may become bored with the routine and cease to extract meaning from it. The length of time before one reengages in a happiness-boosting activity is an important part of its potency in the next appli- cation. By being mindful of the “refractory pe- riod” (Kalat, 2001) after which a recently per- formed activity regains its full happiness-induc- ing potential, individuals may maximize the benefits of the activity over time and avoid reducing or eliminating the activity’s effective- ness through overuse. Thus, people should strive to discover the optimal timing for each activity, that is, a frequency of engagement that allows that activity to remain fresh, meaningful, and positive for a particular person. Intentional activity can be varied. Another important parameter of behavioral, cognitive, and volitional activities is that people can con- tinually vary them, both in their foci and in the ways they engage in them. This may help to reduce adaptation to the activity, allowing it to retain its potency (McAlister, 1982). Indeed, by definition, adaptation does not occur to stimuli that are variable or changeable but only to those that are constant or repeated (cf. Frederick & Figure 2. Longitudinal path model predicting maintained changes in well-being from positive circumstantial changes and positive activity changes. Asterisks indicate p � .01. 120 LYUBOMIRSKY, SHELDON, AND SCHKADE Loewenstein, 1999). For example, a scientist may regularly ask new questions and become involved in new projects. In the process, she often feels the joy of making fascinating new discoveries and thus may remain particularly happy (i.e., at the upper end of her potential range) over a long period of time. If the person counting her blessings varies the domains of life in which she counts them (i.e., in relationships, in work, in her health, or in her most recently successful domain), then the strategy may re- main “fresh” and meaningful and work indefi- nitely. Supporting this notion, past research suggests that people tend to seek variety in their behavior (McAlister, 1982; Ratner, Kahn, & Kahneman, 1999), perhaps because change—in both thoughts and actions—is innately pleasur- able and stimulating (Berlyne, 1970; Rolls et al., 1981). Intentional activity can directly counteract adaptation. Yet another advantage of inten- tional activity is that it can directly tackle the problem presented by adaptation. For example, the cognitive practice of pausing to savor the good things in one’s life can directly counteract the effects of hedonic adaptation to one’s con- stant circumstances by drawing attention to the features that produced the initial happiness boost and helping to keep them from being taken for granted. As another example, prac- ticed meditators frequently report renewed ap- preciation of the ordinary as a result of their intentional reencounters with the world. The fact that intentional activity can directly counteract adaptation and the hedonic treadmill helps shed further light on the distinction be- tween life circumstances and intentional activi- ties. Obviously, many personal characteristics are both. For example, “being married” and “being a student” both denote demographic sta- tus, yet they also reflect particular sorts of ac- tivities. From our perspective, the crucial dis- tinction with respect to well-being is whether one exerts intentional effort with respect to the circumstantial category, that is, whether one acts upon the circumstance (e.g., using inten- tional practices to keep the circumstance “fresh”). For example, an individual can engage in a number of intentional activities with respect to the circumstantial category “marriage”: A husband can have the goal of making his mar- riage work (a volitional activity), he can make the effort to appreciate his wife’s positive qual- ities (an attitudinal activity), and he can try to remember to bring her flowers (a behavioral activity). A person who performs these activi- ties would probably best counteract adaptation to this particular circumstance and derive the most benefit from it. In contrast, consider a husband who is not intentionally engaged in his marriage; for him, this demographic circum- stance would essentially become a background factor, to which adaptation is very likely. For all of these reasons, intentional activity appears to offer the best prospects for increasing and sustaining happiness. Of course, following through on new intentions, such as the ubiqui- tous “New Year’s resolutions,” is not necessar- ily easy (Sheldon & Elliot, 1998). Indeed, we assume that happiness-increasing strategies can be initiated and effectively pursued only with concerted, consistent commitment and effort. Still, activity-based factors are, by definition, under greater potential control by the individual than are genetic, demographic, and most life status factors. In other words, if anything can do it, intentional activity can. Implementing Happiness-Increasing Strategies In this section, we briefly consider several important issues pertaining to how intentional activity might be used for increasing happi- ness. In other words, having established that activity can potentially sustainably elevate happiness, how might one put this potential to work? We discuss these strategic issues in roughly chronological order, proceeding from the question of how to choose a particular happiness-boosting activity to the question of how such activity may be initiated and the question of how the activity can be main- tained over time to produce a sustained in- crease in the chronic level of happiness. In the process, we discuss the issue of person–strat- egy fit, the meaning and nature of effort, the definition and role of habits, and the impact of short-term versus long-term considerations. Choosing an Activity: The Role of Person–Activity Fit Any one particular activity will not help ev- ery person become happier. People have endur- 121SPECIAL ISSUE: ARCHITECTURE OF SUSTAINABLE HAPPINESS ing strengths, interests, values, and inclinations that undoubtedly predispose them to benefit more from some strategies than others. For ex- ample, extraverts may benefit most from activ- ities that bring them into regular contact with other people, and people high in nurturance motivation may benefit most from activities that afford them opportunities to take care of others. This general “matching” hypothesis (Harack- iewicz & Sansone, 1991) is supported by much recent work showing that the positive effects of goal attainment on well-being are moderated by goal–person fit (Brunstein et al., 1998; Diener & Fujita, 1995; Sheldon & Elliot, 1999; Sheldon & Kasser, 1998). It is also supported by past well-being intervention research. For example, in several studies that instructed participants to apply 14 different techniques to increase their personal happiness, the particular techniques considered most effective for raising happiness varied greatly from one individual to another and appeared to be determined by each partici- pant’s needs and areas of specific weakness (Fordyce, 1977, 1983). The fit of an activity with a person might be conceptualized in a variety of ways, for exam- ple, with respect to individuals’ motive dispo- sitions, basic needs, core values, signature strengths, personal resources, hedonic profiles, or other individual-difference characteristics. There are also a variety of ways that fit might be operationalized, such as in terms of self-re- ported fit, in terms of consistency between im- plicit and explicit measures of activity-relevant motives, or in terms of informant-rated person– activity fit. Another approach is to assume that certain kinds of experiences are likely to be beneficial to anyone, because these experiences reflect universal psychological needs. From this point of view, any activity that provides certain experiences, such as those involving belonging- ness (Baumeister & Leary, 1995), self-efficacy (Bandura, 1997), or autonomy (Deci & Ryan, 2000), might be assumed to “fit” the person, a priori. Role of Effort Initiating an activity. We assume that en- gaging in an activity requires at least two dif- ferent kinds of effort: first, the effort required to initiate the activity and, second, the effort re- quired to actually carry out and maintain the activity. This distinction is necessary because it is clear that many activities have definite posi- tive effects if the person can only get started doing them. For example, exercising in the morning, making time to work on at least one important project during the day, or pausing to count one’s blessings at the end of the day can have significant benefits, but only if the person can “get over the hurdle” of remembering to do them and overcoming any obstacles to initiating them. Obviously, those who do not implement their activity intentions stand a worse chance of benefiting from them than those who do! We assume that this kind of self-regulatory effort requires considerable self-discipline and will- power. Furthermore, such effort may constitute a limited resource, one that must be marshaled carefully; in Muraven and Baumeister’s (2000) terms, self-regulatory will is like a “muscle” that has limited capacity in a given unit of time and must be used strategically to avoid fatigue. If this analogy is accurate, then it seems logical that some people develop the muscle to a greater extent than others, thus attaining a greater ability to “get started” on their intentions and gaining greater happiness potential. Of course, some activities will appear intrinsically more appealing and will be easier to jumpstart; this is undoubtedly one advantage of selecting an activity that fits one’s personality. For exam- ple, rather than running on a track, a fitness- seeking wilderness lover might instead choose to run on a trail through the woods, thereby feeling much less initial resistance to beginning the activity. As another example, rather than learning classical pieces, a jazz-loving piano student might instead choose to work on jazz standards, enhancing the intrinsic appeal of sit- ting down to practice. Maintaining an activity. This brings us to the second type of effort. Obviously, if a par- ticular activity is to yield sustained happiness change, the person must keep performing the activity over the long term. For many effective happiness-enhancing activities, this will not be difficult, because the task will probably be in- herently interesting or rewarding and thus will be “autotelic” in nature (Deci & Ryan, 2000), that is, self-reinforcing and self-sustaining. This is especially true to the extent that the person continually varies what he or she does. If, for example, a person shifts attention among sev- eral projects at work, explores new trails in the 122 LYUBOMIRSKY, SHELDON, AND SCHKADE state park, or seeks out interesting new piano pieces, his or her activities should remain intrin- sically enjoyable and conducive to many reward- ing “flow” experiences (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). What if the activity is not enjoyable and thus difficult to maintain? In this case, stopping the activity may not be problematic, because it probably is not working anyway. By emphasiz- ing the importance of enjoying one’s intentional activity, however, we do not mean to imply that people should seek out only “fun” activities. Sometimes choosing to endure boring or even aversive experiences in the short term can have considerable positive effects on chronic happi- ness in the long term; for example, studying for an important exam in a tedious but required class may well represent an excellent invest- ment in one’s future chronic happiness, even though it may detract from one’s momentary happiness. As another example, a naval officer candidate is paying a short-term cost (boot camp) to receive a longer term benefit (a career as an officer). Of note, self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 2000; Sheldon, Joiner, & Williams, 2003) posits that the crucial factor in such cases is whether the person has internalized the non- enjoyable activity, that is, whether he or she is able to find meaning and value expression in it, even if it is not pleasant to perform. From this perspective, the naval officer candidate would pay a smaller short-term cost if he could un- dergo boot camp thinking that “this is important and valuable” rather than thinking that “this is unnecessary and stupid.” The question of when and how to sacrifice short-term happiness in exchange for longer term happiness is an im- portant one, as is the question of how to pro- mote internalization of important happiness-rel- evant activities that are not intrinsically enjoy- able. These questions represent promising directions for future research. Role of Habitual Activity If activities such as “looking on the bright side,” “making time for the things that matter,” and “working on an important life goal” make a difference for happiness, then it seems it would be a good idea to make a habit of doing them. However, on the surface, habits appear to present a conundrum for our model. Is it not the case that acquiring a habit means that one has turned a formerly conscious activity into an unconscious routine, practiced automatically and without variation? If so, is it not the case that one is especially likely to experience hedo- nic adaptation to that activity, such that it loses its happiness-boosting potential? We think not. However, to illustrate, we must first distinguish between the habit of regularly initiating a potentially beneficial activity and the habit of implementing it the same way every time (the two types of effort mentioned earlier). We assume that hedonic adaptation occurs only with respect to particular experiences, and not with respect to the decisions that give rise to those experiences. Thus, making a habit out of deciding to initiate an activity is not problem- atic but may instead help people to keep getting “over the hump.” For example, a woman might make running an automatic part of her daily routine, such that she does not even have to make the decision of whether or not to run each day, thus deriving considerable benefit. What is potentially problematic is when people make a habit out of how they implement the activity. When this happens, the flow of experiences produced by such a habit is likely to remain relatively constant, and thus, adaptation is likely to have the most pernicious effects. To over- come this, as suggested earlier, people should mindfully attend to optimal timing and variety in the ways they practice an activity. For exam- ple, the woman might want to vary the route, time of day, and speed of her running. This will help forestall the effects of adaptation. Extensions and Further Questions Now that we have presented our basic con- ceptual model of sustainable changes in happi- ness, we briefly consider a variety of additional issues that extend beyond this basic model. What are the key ingredients of particular ac- tivities that lead a person to a higher level of well-being? Although this question is somewhat peripheral to our model, it merits brief discus- sion. We assume that happiness increases come from at least two sources that are described, respectively, by bottom-up and top-down theo- ries of well-being (Diener, 1994). Bottom-up theories postulate that people make global well- being judgments in part with reference to emo- tions associated with their recent experiences (Kahneman, 1999). If they can recall a large 123SPECIAL ISSUE: ARCHITECTURE OF SUSTAINABLE HAPPINESS number of recent affectively positive experi- ences, then they report being very happy (see Sheldon & Elliot, 1999, for supporting data). Studies have produced support for this bot- tom-up perspective by showing that accumula- tions of need-satisfying daily experiences over time (such as competence, relatedness, and au- tonomy; Deci & Ryan, 2000) lead to enhanced global well-being at the end of that time (Reis, Sheldon, Ryan, Gable, & Roscoe, 2000; Shel- don, Ryan, & Reis, 1996). Furthermore, Shel- don and Lyubomirsky (2004) found, in their comparison of the sustained effects of circum- stantial changes and activity changes on changes in well-being among students, that the more enduring activity-based effects on happi- ness were mediated by the greater feelings of competence and relatedness associated with ac- tivity changes during the semester. But what about when people say they are happy despite having had recent negative emo- tional experiences? Although bottom-up theo- ries cannot account for this, top-down theories can. According to such models, well-being judgments are in part determined by global at- titudinal or meaning-based factors. Thus, a per- son who “suffers for a cause” might still feel very happy because her suffering demonstrates her commitment to, and also perhaps moves her closer to obtaining, an important life goal. As another example, a man who has a bad day at work might still report being very happy that night, because of a short but meaningful visit from his grandchildren that evening that helped him to reframe the day. Again, we believe that intentional activity can lead to new well-being by both top-down and bottom-up routes, that is, both via accumulations of small positive expe- riences and via a sense of global meaning and purpose. Preliminary Data: Happiness Interventions The model of sustainable happiness that we have proposed has clear implications for how to design interventions for increasing happiness. Before describing these, we first discuss some of the few happiness intervention studies that have been conducted, to show their general con- sistency with our approach. As noted earlier, Fordyce (1977, 1983) conducted several happi- ness intervention studies in which he taught 14 happiness-relevant strategies to students as part of their coursework. All of the strategies fit into one or more of the three categories of activity outlined earlier: behavioral (e.g., “spend more time socializing”), cognitive (e.g., “become present oriented”), and volitional (e.g., “get bet- ter organized and plan things out”). Consistent with our conceptual model, Fordyce found that the strategies worked; that is, a significant main effect of participation was found for the exper- imental conditions. Again, intentional activity can successfully increase happiness. Also con- sistent with our model, he found that some strategies worked better than others and, in ad- dition, that person–strategy fit had a moderating effect on strategy effectiveness. More recently, Sheldon and colleagues (2002) conducted an intervention study based on participants’ personal goals. Early in the semester, they taught experimental participants a set of four strategies for enhancing their ex- perience and attainment of their personal goals: “own the goal,” “make it fun,” “keep a bal- ance,” and “remember the big picture.” Consis- tent with the studies cited earlier, goal attain- ment predicted increases in well-being at the end of the semester. Interestingly, there was no main effect of experimental condition on in- creased well-being or goal attainment. Instead, a significant interaction was observed, such that only participants whose goals “fit” their inter- ests and values benefited from the intervention. In other words, those with self-concordant goals who received the intervention evidenced the greatest goal attainment and, thus, the greatest increase in well-being. In addition to demon- strating that happiness-boosting interventions can work for at least some people, this finding provides further support for our proposition that the fit of the activity to the person makes a difference. Obviously, much future work remains to be done regarding happiness-increasing interven- tions, particularly research that explicitly ma- nipulates the various factors in our model. As a preliminary test, Lyubomirsky, Tkach, and Sheldon (2004) recently conducted two 6-week happiness-enhancing interventions based in be- havioral and cognitive–attitudinal change. Drawing on promising interventions grounded in the positive psychology tradition—that is, focused on building positive affect and personal strengths rather than on reducing or coping with negative affect, pathology, or weakness—they 124 LYUBOMIRSKY, SHELDON, AND SCHKADE used two diverse strategies (one cognitive and one social behavioral) to serve as initial exis- tence proofs of our conceptual model. To this end, experimental participants were prompted to perform kind acts or to pause and “count their blessings.” The strategy of committing acts of kindness was expected, on the basis of previous theory and research, to boost temporary moods and long-lasting well-being. For example, individu- als who report a greater interest in helping oth- ers, an inclination to act in a prosocial manner, or intentions to perform altruistic or courteous behaviors are more likely to rate themselves as dispositionally happy (see Lyubomirsky, King, & Diener, 2004, for a review). We assume that acts of kindness and generosity can boost hap- piness in a variety of ways. Such acts may foster a charitable perception of others and one’s com- munity, an increased sense of cooperation and interdependence, and an awareness of one’s good fortune. In addition, people who commit acts of kindness may begin to view themselves as altruistic people, as well as to feel more confident, efficacious, in control, and optimistic about their ability to help. Furthermore, acts of generosity can inspire greater liking by others, along with appreciation, gratitude, and proso- cial reciprocity (Trivers, 1971), all of which are valuable in times of stress and need. Finally, kind behaviors may help satisfy a basic human need for relatedness (Baumeister & Leary, 1995), thereby contributing to increased happiness. Thus, in their first intervention, Lyubomir- sky, Tkach, and Sheldon (2004) asked students to perform five acts of kindness per week over the course of 6 weeks, either all five acts in 1 day or five acts spread over the week. Such acts were described as behaviors that benefit other people or make others happy, usually at some cost to oneself (e.g., donating blood, helping a friend with a paper, visiting an elderly relative, or writing a thank-you note to a former profes- sor). A no-treatment control group simply com- pleted measures of well-being immediately be- fore the intervention and immediately after. The results, displayed in the top panel of Figure 3, provided preliminary evidence that a short-term happiness-enhancing activity can increase well- being. Furthermore, supporting our model’s predictions, Lyubomirsky et al. found that op- timal timing was critical. Whereas control par- ticipants experienced a reduction in happiness over the course of the 6-week period, partici- pants who committed acts of kindness experi- enced a significant increase in well-being, but this increase was evident only among those who showed their weekly generosity all in a single day. Because many of the kind acts that students performed were small ones, spreading them over the course of a week might have dimin- ished their salience and power or made them less distinguishable from participants’ habitual kind behavior. The second intervention tested a cognitive happiness-increasing activity. Recently, Em- mons and McCullough (2003) found that prac- ticing grateful thinking on a regular basis can enhance concurrent well-being. Gratitude pro- motes the savoring of positive life experiences and situations so that maximum satisfaction and enjoyment are distilled from one’s circum- stances. As noted earlier, this practice may di- rectly counteract the effects of hedonic adapta- tion by helping people extract as much appre- ciation from the good things in their lives as possible. In addition, the ability to appreciate their life circumstances may also be an adaptive Figure 3. Changes in well-being over the course of two 6-week interventions: performing acts of kindness (top) and counting one’s blessings (bottom). 125SPECIAL ISSUE: ARCHITECTURE OF SUSTAINABLE HAPPINESS coping strategy by which people positively re- interpret stressful or negative life experiences, bolster coping resources, and strengthen social relationships. Finally, the practice of gratitude appears to be incompatible with negative emo- tions and thus may reduce feelings of envy, anger, or greed. Thus, in the second 6-week intervention, stu- dents were instructed to contemplate “the things for which they are grateful” either once a week or three times a week. Examples of “blessings” listed by students included “a healthy body,” “my mom,” and “AOL instant messenger.” Control participants completed only the happi- ness assessments. The results again suggested that short-term increases in happiness are pos- sible and, furthermore, that optimal timing is important. In summary, students who regularly expressed gratitude showed increases in well- being over the course of the study relative to controls, but these increases were observed only among students who performed the activity just once a week (see Figure 3, bottom panel). Per- haps counting their blessings several times a week led people to become bored with the prac- tice, finding it less fresh and meaningful over time. Although the results of these two interven- tions are encouraging, they notably did not test the sustainability of the well-being increases for the experimental groups (i.e., “kindness” and “blessings”) and did not examine the impact of key moderators of activity effects. In the future, in addition to assessing the efficacy of different activities for producing sustainable increases in well-being, we will investigate the effects of such potential moderators as fit, effectiveness, timing, variety, cultural membership, social support, and the habits associated with the activity. What are the most general recommendations for increasing happiness suggested by our model? Simply, happiness seekers might be ad- vised to find new activities to become engaged in, preferably activities that fit their values and interests. They should make a habit out of ini- tiating the activity while at the same time vary- ing their focus and timing in terms of the way they implement the activity. People might be advised to avoid basing their happiness on the acquisition of particular circumstances or ob- jects (e.g., buying a luxury car or moving to California), because they will tend to habituate to such stable factors. Again, however, one can deter, or at least delay, such adaptation to pos- itive circumstantial changes by engaging in in- tentional effort and activity with respect to them. That is, if one can remember to appreciate or actively engage with the object or circum- stance (i.e., pause to savor the new Mercedes or take advantage of the California weather), then stable objects and circumstances may not be stable after all, from a phenomenological per- spective. Thus, it remains the case that only life changes involving intentional activity can be expected to lead to sustainable changes in well-being. Conclusion If it is meaningful and important to pursue happiness, then it is crucial to find out how this can be accomplished. To what extent, and how, can people succeed in making themselves hap- pier? In this article, we have attempted to inte- grate what is known about happiness change, especially longitudinal variations in well-being, into a single summary model. The model en- compasses a wide variety of findings and sug- gests a number of new directions for research. More than two centuries have passed since the “pursuit of happiness” was proclaimed as a di- vinely ordained human right. We believe it is finally time for the issue of sustainable well- being to be given the scientific attention that it deserves. References Argyle, M. (1999). Causes and correlates of happi- ness. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 353–373). New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Aristotle. (1974). The Nichomachean ethics (J. A. K. Thomson, Trans.). New York: Penguin. Ashby, F. G., Isen, A. M., & Turken, A. U. (1999). A neuropsychological theory of positive affect and its influence on cognition. Psychological Review, 106, 529–550. Aspinwall, L. G. (1998). Rethinking the role of pos- itive affect in self-regulation. Motivation and Emo- tion, 22, 1–32. Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman. Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments as 126 LYUBOMIRSKY, SHELDON, AND SCHKADE a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–529. Berlyne, D. (1970). Novelty, complexity, and hedo- nic value. Perception & Psychophysics, 8, 279– 286. Braungart, J. M., Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., & Fulker, D. W. (1992). Genetic influence on tester- rated infant temperament as assessed by Bayley’s Infant Behavior Record: Nonadoptive and adop- tive siblings and twins. Developmental Psychol- ogy, 28, 40–47. Brickman, P., & Campbell, D. T. (1971). Hedonic relativism and planning the good society. In M. H. Appley (Ed.), Adaptation-level theory (pp. 287– 302). New York: Academic Press. Brickman, P., Coates, D., & Janoff-Bulman, R. (1978). Lottery winners and accident victims: Is happiness relative? Journal of Personality and So- cial Psychology, 36, 917–927. Brown, D. R. (1953). Stimulus similarity and the anchoring of subjective scales. American Journal of Psychology, 66, 199–214. Brunstein, J. (1993). Personal goals and subjective well-being: A longitudinal study. Journal of Per- sonality and Social Psychology, 65, 1061–1070. Brunstein, J. C., Schultheiss, O. C., & Grassman, R. (1998). Personal goals and emotional well-being: The moderating role of motive dispositions. Jour- nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 494–508. Carlson, R. (1997). You can be happy no matter what: Five principles for keeping life in perspec- tive. Novato, CA: New World Library. Carstensen, L. L. (1995). Evidence for a life-span theory of socioemotional selectivity. Current Di- rections in Psychological Science, 4, 151–156. Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1990). Origins and functions of positive and negative affect: A con- trol-process view. Psychological Review, 97, 19– 35. Charles, S. T., Reynolds, C. A., & Gatz, M. (2001). Age-related differences and change in positive and negative affect over 23 years. Journal of Person- ality and Social Psychology, 80, 136–151. Costa, P. T., McCrae, R. R., & Zonderman, A. B. (1987). Environmental and dispositional influ- ences on well-being: Longitudinal follow-up of an American national sample. British Journal of Psy- chology, 78, 299–306. Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: Harper & Row. Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Wong, M. M. (1991). The situational and personal correlates of happiness: A cross-national comparison. In F. Strack, M. Ar- gyle, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Subjective well-being: An interdisciplinary perspective (pp. 193–212). Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press. Danner, D. D., Snowdon, D. A., & Friesen, W. V. (2001). Positive emotions in early life and longev- ity: Findings from the nun study. Journal of Per- sonality and Social Psychology, 80, 804–813. Dar, R., Ariely, D., & Frank, H. (1995). The effect of past injury on pain threshold and tolerance. Pain, 60, 189–193. Davidson, R. J. (1999). Neuropsychological perspec- tives on affective styles and their cognitive conse- quences. In T. Dalgleish & M. J. Power (Eds.), Handbook of cognition and emotion (pp. 103– 123). Chichester, England: Wiley. Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self-determination of behavior. Psychological In- quiry, 4, 227–268. DeNeve, K. M., & Cooper, H. (1998). The happy personality: A meta-analysis of 137 personality traits and subjective well-being. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 197–229. Depue, R. A., & Collins, P. F. (1999). Neurobiology of the structure of personality: Dopamine, facilita- tion of incentive motivation, and extraversion. Be- havioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 491–569. Diener, E. (1984). Subjective well-being. Psycholog- ical Bulletin, 95, 542–575. Diener, E. (1994). Assessing subjective well-being: Progress and opportunities. Social Indicators Re- search, 31, 103–157. Diener, E., & Fujita, F. (1995). Resources, personal strivings, and subjective well-being: A nomothetic and idiographic approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 926–935. Diener, E., Gohm, C. L., Suh, E., & Oishi, S. (2000). Similarity of the relations between marital status and subjective well-being across cultures. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 31, 419–436. Diener, E., & Lucas, R. E. (1999). Personality and subjective well-being. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwartz (Eds.), Well-being: The founda- tions of hedonic psychology (pp. 213–229). New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Diener, E., Sandvik, E., Seidlitz, L., & Diener, M. (1993). The relationship between income and sub- jective well-being: Relative or absolute? Social Indicators Research, 28, 195–223. Diener, E., & Suh, E. M. (1998). Subjective well- being and age: An international analysis. In K. W. Schaie & M. P. Lawton (Eds.), Annual review of gerontology and geriatrics: Focus on emotion and adult development (Vol. 17, pp. 304–324). New York: Springer. Diener, E., Suh, E. M., Lucas, R. E., & Smith, H. L. (1999). Subjective well-being: Three decades of progress. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 276–302. Diener, E., Suh, E. M., Smith, H., & Shao, L. (1995). National differences in reported well-being: Why 127SPECIAL ISSUE: ARCHITECTURE OF SUSTAINABLE HAPPINESS do they occur? Social Indicators Research, 34, 7–32. Dillon, K. M., Minchoff, B., & Baker, K. H. (1985). Positive emotional states and enhancement of the immune system. International Journal of Psychi- atry in Medicine, 15, 13–18. Emmons, R. A., & King, L. A. (1988). Conflict among personal strivings: Immediate and long- term implications for psychological and physical well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psy- chology, 54, 1040–1048. Emmons, R. A., & McCullough, M. E. (2003). Counting blessings versus burdens: An experimen- tal investigation of gratitude and subjective well- being in daily life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 377–389. Estrada, C., Isen, A. M., & Young, M. J. (1994). Positive affect influences creative problem solving and reported source of practice satisfaction in phy- sicians. Motivation and Emotion, 18, 285–299. Fava, G. (1999). Well-being therapy: Conceptual and technical issues. Psychotherapy and Psychosomat- ics, 68, 171–179. Fordyce, M. W. (1977). Development of a program to increase happiness. Journal of Counseling Psy- chology, 24, 511–521. Fordyce, M. W. (1983). A program to increase hap- piness: Further studies. Journal of Counseling Psy- chology, 30, 483–498. Frederick, S., & Loewenstein, G. (1999). Hedonic adaptation. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 302–329). New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emo- tions in positive psychology: The broaden-and- build theory of positive emotions. American Psy- chologist, 56, 218–226. Fredrickson, B. L., & Joiner, T. (2002). Positive emotions trigger upward spirals toward emotional well-being. Psychological Science, 13, 172–175. Freedman, J. (1978). Happy people: What happiness is, who has it, and why. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Frijda, N. H. (1999). Emotions and hedonic experi- ence. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 190–210). New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Gallup, G. G., Jr. (1984, March). Commentary on the state of religion in the U. S. today. Religion in America: The Gallup Report, No. 222. Gaskins, R. W. (1999). “Adding legs to a snake”: A reanalysis of motivation and the pursuit of happi- ness from a Zen Buddhist perspective. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 204–215. Gloaguen, V., Cottraux, J., Cucherat, M., & Black- burn, I. (1998). A meta-analysis of the effects of cognitive therapy in depressed patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 49, 59–72. Gray, J. A. (1990). Brain systems that mediate both emotion and cognition. Cognition and Emotion, 4, 269–288. Harackiewicz, J. M., & Sansone, C. (1991). Goals and intrinsic motivation: You can get there from here. In M. L. Maehr & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.), Advances in motivation and achievement (Vol. 7, pp. 21–49). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. Harker, L., & Keltner, D. (2001). Expressions of positive emotions in women’s college yearbook pictures and their relationship to personality and life outcomes across adulthood. Journal of Person- ality and Social Psychology, 80, 112–124. Headey, B., & Wearing, A. (1989). Personality, life events, and subjective well-being: Toward a dy- namic equilibrium model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 731–739. Isen, A. M. (1970). Success, failure, attention and reaction to others: The warm glow of success. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 15, 294–301. Jacobson, N. S., Dobson, K. S., Truax, P. A., Addis, M. E., Koerner, K., Gollan, J. K., et al. (1996). A component analysis of cognitive-behavioral treat- ment for depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 295–304. Jahoda, M. (1958). Current concepts of positive men- tal health. New York: Basic Books. Kagan, J. (2003). Biology, context and developmen- tal inquiry. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 1–23. Kahneman, D. (1999). Objective happiness. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well- being: The foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 3–25). New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Kalat, J. W. (2001). Biological psychology (7th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. Kasser, T., & Ryan, R. M. (1996). Further examining the American dream: Differential correlates of in- trinsic and extrinsic goals. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 280–287. Keltner, D., & Bonanno, G. A. (1997). A study of laughter and dissociation: Distinct correlates of laughter and smiling during bereavement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 687– 702. King, L. A. (2001). The health benefits of writing about life goals. Personality and Social Psychol- ogy Bulletin, 27, 798–807. Larsen, R. J., & Fredrickson, B. L. (1999). Measure- ment issues in emotion research. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 40–60). New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Lerner, J. S., Taylor, S. E., Gonzalez, R. M., & Stayn, H. B. (2002). Emotion, physiological reactivity, 128 LYUBOMIRSKY, SHELDON, AND SCHKADE and visceral self perception. Manuscript submitted for publication. Lichter, S., Haye, K., & Kammann, R. (1980). In- creasing happiness through cognitive retraining. New Zealand Psychologist, 9, 57–64. Lucas, R. E., Clark, A. E., Georgellis, Y., & Diener, E. (2003). Reexamining adaptation and the set point model of happiness: Reactions to changes in marital status. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 527–539. Lykken, D. (2000). Happiness: The nature and nur- ture of joy and contentment. New York: St. Mar- tin’s Press. Lykken, D., & Tellegen, A. (1996). Happiness is a stochastic phenomenon. Psychological Science, 7, 186–189. Lyubomirsky, S. (2001). Why are some people hap- pier than others?: The role of cognitive and moti- vational processes in well-being. American Psy- chologist, 56, 239–249. Lyubomirsky, S., King, L. A., & Diener, E. (2004). Is happiness a strength?: An examination of the ben- efits and costs of frequent positive affect. Manu- script submitted for publication. Lyubomirsky, S., & Lepper, H. S. (1999). A measure of subjective happiness: Preliminary reliability and construct validation. Social Indicators Re- search, 46, 137–155. Lyubomirsky, S., & Ross, L. (1997). Hedonic con- sequences of social comparison: A contrast of happy and unhappy people. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 1141–1157. Lyubomirsky, S., Sousa, L., & Dickerhoof, R. (2004). The medium is the message: The costs and benefits of thinking, writing, and talking about life’s triumphs and defeats. Manuscript submitted for publication. Lyubomirsky, S., Tkach, C., & Sheldon, K. M. (2004). [Pursuing sustained happiness through ran- dom acts of kindness and counting one’s blessings: Tests of two six-week interventions]. Unpublished raw data. Magen, Z., & Aharoni, R. (1991). Adolescents’ con- tributing toward others: Relationship to positive experiences and transpersonal commitment. Jour- nal of Humanistic Psychology, 31, 126–143. Marks, G. N., & Fleming, N. (1999). Influences and consequences of well-being among Australian young people: 1980–1995. Social Indicators Re- search, 46, 301–323. Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1994). The cultural shaping of emotion: A conceptual framework. In S. Kitayama & H. R. Markus (Eds.), Emotion and culture: Empirical studies of mutual influences (pp. 339–351). Washington, DC: American Psy- chological Association. Mastekaasa, A. (1994). Marital status, distress, and well-being: An international comparison. Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 25, 183–205. McAlister, L. (1982). A dynamic attribute satiation model of variety-seeking behavior. Journal of Consumer Research, 9, 141–150. McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1986). Personality, coping, and coping effectiveness in an adult sam- ple. Journal of Personality, 54, 385–405. McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1990). Personality in adulthood. New York: Guilford Press. McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1994). The stability of personality: Observations and evaluations. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 3, 173–175. McCullough, M. E., Pargament, K. I., & Thoresen, C. E. (Eds.). (2000). Forgiveness: Theory, re- search, and practice. New York: Guilford Press. McGregor, I., & Little, B. R. (1998). Personal projects, happiness, and meaning: On doing well and being yourself. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 494–512. Muraven, M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Self- regulation and depletion of limited resources: Does self-control resemble a muscle? Psychological Bulletin, 126, 247–259. Myers, D. G. (2000). The funds, friends, and faith of happy people. American Psychologist, 55, 56–67. Myers, D. G., & Diener, E. (1995). Who is happy? Psychological Science, 6, 10–19. Norcross, J. C., Santrock, J. W., Campbell, L. F., Smith, T. P., Sommer, R., & Zuckerman, E. L. (2000). Authoritative guide to self-help resources in mental health. New York: Guilford Press. Okun, M. A., Stock, W. A., Haring, M. J., & Witter, R. A. (1984). The social activity/subjective well- being relation: A quantitative synthesis. Research on Aging, 6, 45–65. Ostir, G. V., Markides, K. S., Black, S. A., & Good- win, J. S. (2000). Emotional well-being predicts subsequent functional independence and survival. Journal of the American Geriatric Society, 48, 473–478. Parducci, A. (1995). Happiness, pleasure, and judg- ment: The contextual theory and its applications. Hove, England: Erlbaum. Ransford, H. E., & Palisi, B. J. (1996). Aerobic exercise, subjective health and psychological well- being within age and gender subgroups. Social Science and Medicine, 42, 1555–1559. Ratner, R. K., Kahn, B. E., & Kahneman, D. (1999). Choosing less-preferred experiences for the sake of variety. Journal of Consumer Research, 26, 1–15. Reis, H. T., Sheldon, K. M., Ryan, R. M., Gable, S. L., & Roscoe, J. (2000). Daily well-being: The role of autonomy, competence, and relatedness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 419–443. 129SPECIAL ISSUE: ARCHITECTURE OF SUSTAINABLE HAPPINESS Roberts, B. W., & Chapman, C. N. (2000). Change in dispositional well-being and its relation to role quality: A 30-year longitudinal study. Journal of Research in Personality, 34, 26–41. Robinson, J. L., Emde, R. N., & Corley, R. P. (2001). Dispositional cheerfulness: Early genetic and en- vironmental influences. In R. N. Emde & J. K. Hewitt (Eds.), Infancy to early childhood: Genetic and environmental influences on developmental change (pp. 163–177). London: Oxford University Press. Rolls, B., Rowe, E., Rolls, E., Kingston, B., Megson, A., & Gunary, R. (1981). Variety in a meal en- hances food intake in man. Physiology and Behav- ior, 26, 215–221. Sandvik, E., Diener, E., & Seidlitz, L. (1993). Sub- jective well-being: The convergence and stability of self-report and non-self-report measures. Jour- nal of Personality, 61, 317–342. Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1993). On the power of positive thinking: The benefits of being optimis- tic. Current Directions in Psychological Sci- ence, 2, 26–30. Schkade, D. A., & Kahneman, D. (1998). Does living in California make people happy?: A focusing illusion in judgments of life satisfaction. Psycho- logical Science, 9, 340–346. Schooler, J. W., Ariely, D., & Loewenstein, G. (in press). The explicit pursuit and assessment of hap- piness can be self-defeating. In J. Carrillo & I. Brocas (Eds.), Psychology and economics. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. Schwartz, B. (2000). Pitfalls on the road to a positive psychology of hope. In J. E. Gillham & J. Temple- ton (Eds.), The science of optimism and hope: Research essays in honor of Martin E. P. Seligman (pp. 399–412). Philadelphia: Templeton Founda- tion Press. Schwarz, N., & Strack, F. (1999). Reports of subjec- tive well-being: Judgmental processes and their methodological implications. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 61–84). New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Seidlitz, L., Wyer, R. S., & Diener, E. (1997). Cog- nitive correlates of subjective well-being: The pro- cessing of valenced life events by happy and un- happy persons. Journal of Research in Personal- ity, 31, 240–256. Seligman, M. E. P. (1991). Learned optimism. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. Seligman, M. E. P., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An introduction. American Psychologist, 55, 5–14. Sheldon, K. M. (2002). The self-concordance model of healthy goal-striving: When personal goals cor- rectly represent the person. In E. L. Deci & R. M. Ryan (Eds.), Handbook of self-determination re- search (pp. 65–86). Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press. Sheldon, K. M. (2004). The benefits of a “sidelong” approach to self-esteem need-satisfaction: Com- ment on Crocker and Park (2004). Psychological Bulletin, 130, 421–424. Sheldon, K. M., & Elliot, A. J. (1998). Not all per- sonal goals are personal: Comparing autonomous and controlled reasons for goals as predictors of effort and attainment. Personality and Social Psy- chology Bulletin, 24, 546–557. Sheldon, K. M., & Elliot, A. J. (1999). Goal striving, need-satisfaction, and longitudinal well-being: The self-concordance model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 482–497. Sheldon, K. M., & Houser-Marko, L. (2001). Self- concordance, goal-attainment, and the pursuit of happiness: Can there be an upward spiral? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 152– 165. Sheldon, K. M., Joiner, T., & Williams, G. (2003). Self-determination theory in the clinic: Motivating physical and mental health. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Sheldon, K. M., & Kasser, T. (1995). Coherence and congruence: Two aspects of personality integra- tion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- ogy, 68, 531–543. Sheldon, K. M., & Kasser, T. (1998). Pursuing per- sonal goals: Skills enable progress but not all progress is beneficial. Personality and Social Psy- chology Bulletin, 24, 1319–1331. Sheldon, K. M., & Kasser, T. (2001). Getting older, getting better?: Personal strivings and psycholog- ical maturity across the life span. Developmental Psychology, 37, 491–501. Sheldon, K. M., Kasser, T., Smith, K., & Share, T. (2002). Personal goals and psychological growth: Testing an intervention to enhance goal-attainment and personality integration. Journal of Personal- ity, 70, 5–31. Sheldon, K. M., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2004). Achiev- ing sustainable gains in happiness: Change your actions, not your circumstances. Manuscript sub- mitted for publication. Sheldon, K. M., Ryan, R. M., & Reis, H. T. (1996). What makes for a good day?: Competence and autonomy in the day and in the person. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 1270–1279. Snyder, C. R., Ilardi, S., Michael, S. T., & Cheavens, J. (2000). Hope theory: Updating a common pro- cess for psychological change. In C. R. Snyder & R. E. Ingram (Eds.), Handbook of psychological change: Psychotherapy processes and practices for the 21st century (pp. 128–153). New York: Wiley. Snyder, M., & Omoto, A. M. (2001). Basic research and practical problems: Volunteerism and the psy- 130 LYUBOMIRSKY, SHELDON, AND SCHKADE chology of individual and collective action. In W. Wosinska, R. B. Cialdini, D. W. Barrett, & J. Reykowski (Eds.), The practice of social influence in multiple cultures (pp. 287–307). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Staw, B. M., Sutton, R. I., & Pelled, L. H. (1995). Employee positive emotion and favorable out- comes at the workplace. Organization Science, 5, 51–71. Stewart, A. L., Mills, K. M., Sepsis, P. G., King, A. C., McLellan, B. Y., Roitz, K., & Ritter, P. L. (1997). Evaluation of CHAMPS, a physical activ- ity promotion program for older adults. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 19, 353–361. Stone, A. A., Neale, J. M., Cox, D. S., Napoli, A., Vadlimarsdottir, V., & Kennedy-Moore, E. (1994). Daily events are associated with a secretory im- mune response to an oral antigen in men. Health Psychology, 13, 440–446. Suh, E. M., Diener, E., & Fujita, F. (1996). Events and subjective well-being: Only recent events mat- ter. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- ogy, 70, 1091–1102. Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and well-being: A social psychological perspective on mental health. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193– 210. Tellegen, A., Lykken, D. T., Bouchard, T. J., Wilcox, K. J., Segal, N. L., & Rich, S. (1988). Personality similarity in twins reared apart and together. Jour- nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1031–1039. Triandis, H. C., Bontempo, R., Leung, K., & Hui, C. H. (1990). A method for determining cultural, demographic, and personal constructs. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 21, 302–318. Trivers, R. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altru- ism. Quarterly Review of Biology, 46, 35–57. Tversky, A., & Griffin, D. (1991). Endowment and contrast in judgments of well-being. In F. Strack, M. Argyle, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Subjective well- being: An interdisciplinary perspective (pp. 101– 118). Oxford, England: Pergamon Press. Warr, P., & Payne, R. (1982). Experience of strain and pleasure among British adults. Social Science and Medicine, 16, 1691–1697. Williams, S., & Shiaw, W. T. (1999). Mood and organizational citizenship behavior: The effects of positive affect on employee organizational citizen- ship behavior intentions. Journal of Psychology, 133, 656–668. Received September 25, 2004 Accepted September 28, 2004 � 131SPECIAL ISSUE: ARCHITECTURE OF SUSTAINABLE HAPPINESS