Biological Consequences of Ecosystem Fragmentation: A Review Society for Conservation Biology Biological Consequences of Ecosystem Fragmentation: A Review Author(s): Denis A. Saunders, Richard J. Hobbs and Chris R. Margules Reviewed work(s): Source: Conservation Biology, Vol. 5, No. 1 (Mar., 1991), pp. 18-32 Published by: Wiley-Blackwell for Society for Conservation Biology Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2386335 . Accessed: 11/10/2012 13:03 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. . Wiley-Blackwell and Society for Conservation Biology are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Conservation Biology. http://www.jstor.org http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=black http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=scbiol http://www.jstor.org/stable/2386335?origin=JSTOR-pdf http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp Review Biological Consequences of Ecosystem Fragmentation: A Review DENIS A. SAUNDERS CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology LMB 4 P.O. Midland Western Australia 6056, Australia RICHARD J. HOBBS CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology LMB 4 P.O. Midland Western Australia 6056, Australia CHRIS R. MARGULES CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology P.O. Box 84 Lyneham Australian Capital Territory 2602, Australia Abstract: Research on fragmented ecosystems has focused mostly on the biogeographic consequences of the creation of habitat "islands" of different sizes, and has provided little of practical value to managers. However, ecosystem fragmen- tation causes large changes in the physical environment as well as biogeographic changes. Fragmentation generally re- sults in a landscape that consists of remnant areas of native vegetation surrounded by a matrix of agricultural or other developed land. As a result, fluxes of radiation; momentum (i.e., wind), water, and nutrients across the landscape are altered significantly. These in turn can have important in- fluences on the biota within remnant areas, especially at or near the edge between the remnant and the surrounding ma- trix. The isolation of remnant areas by clearing also has important consequences for the biota These consequences vary with the time since isolation; distance from other rem- nants, and degree of connectivity with other remnants. The influences of physical and biogeographic changes are mod- ified by the size, shape, and position in the landscape of individual remnants, with larger remnants being less ad- versely affected by the fragmentation process. The dynamics Resumen: La investigacion sobre los ecosistemas fragmen- tados se ha enfocado principalmente en las consecuencias biogeograficas de la creacion de "islas" de habitat de difer- entes tamaniosy ha sido de muypoco valorpracticopara los manejadores del recurso. Como quiera que sea la fragmen- tacion de los ecosistemas causa grandes cambios en el medio ambiente fisico asi como en el ambito biogeografico. La fragmentacion resulta generalmente en terrenos que consis- ten de areas remanentes de vegetacion nativa rodeada de una matriz de tierras agricolas u otras formas de uso de la tierra Como un resultado de esto, el flujo de la radiacion; del momentum (ej. el viento), del agua y de los nutrientes a traves de la tierra son alterados significativamente. Esto en su turno, puede influenciar e la biota dentro de las areas remanentes, especialmente en o cerca de los limites entre los remanentes y la matriz que los rodea El aislamiento de las areas remanentespor la tala tambien tiene importantes con- secuenciaspara la biotay estas consecuencias varian con, el tiempo desde el momento del aislamiento, la distancia hasta los otros remanentes y el grado de coneccion entre ellos. La influencia de los cambios fisicos y biogeograficos es modi- ficada por el tamanio, la formay la posicion en el terreno de remanentes individuales siendo los remanentes grandes los menos afectados adversamante por el proceso de fragmen- tacion. La dinamica de las areas remanentes son dirigidas Paper submitted May 2, 1990; revised manuscript accepted Septem- ber 20, 1990. 18 Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 Saunders et al. Consequences of Fragnentation 19 of remnant areas are predominantly driven by factors aris- ing in the surrounding landscape. Management of, and re- search on, fragmented ecosystems should be directed at understanding and controlling these external influences as much as at the biota of the remnants themselves. There is a strong need to develop an integrated approach to landscape management thatplaces conservation reserves in the context of the overall landscape. Introduction Since the development of agriculture, the natural vege- tation cover of every continent except Antarctica has been extensively modified. A cycle of agricultural de- velopment followed by overexploitation of the land has been repeated throughout recorded history. Forman (1987) quotes Plato's (ca. 2350 BP) description of how an area of ancient Greece was stripped of its soil follow- ing clearing and grazing, leaving "the mere skeleton of the land." Overexploitation and the use of inappropriate agricultural practices have led to desert encroachment, as in the Sahel region in North Africa (Le Houerou & Gillet 1986; Ehrlich & Ehrlich 1987), and to extensive loss of soil, often with disastrous and dramatic conse- quences, as in the Dust Bowl of the United States (Hud- son 1981). The process of land clearing and the consequent en- vironmental degradation is continuing rapidly in many regions such as Southeast Asia and South America, par- ticularly in areas of tropical rain forest (Myers 1988). Australia provides an example of recent agricultural de- velopment, with vast areas being cleared over the last 100 years for cereal cropping and stock grazing (Saun- ders & Hobbs 1989; Hobbs & Hopkins 1990; Saunders et al. 1990). In some regions over 93% of the native vegetation has been removed and the agricultural land that has replaced it is subject to extensive wind and water erosion or soil salinization, with consequent pol- lution of water supplies for drinking and irrigation. One legacy of the extensive removal of native vege- tation is that the remaining vegetation is usually in frag- mented patches across the landscape. These patches or remnants are situated in different positions in the land- scape and on different soil types, possess different veg- etation types, and vary in their size, shape, isolation, and type of ownership. Over much of the world, conserva- tion of regional biotas depends entirely on the retention and management of these remnants. Conservation man- agers are therefore faced with the dual issues of whether the remnants have any practical conservation values, and if they do, of how they must be managed to retain these values (Saunders et al. 1987a). In this paper we use the word remnant to define any patch of native vegetation around which most or all of predominantemente por factores que surgen en el terreno circundante. El manejoy la investigacion de los ecosistemas fragmentados deberi'a de dirigirse tanto al entendimiento y control de estas influencias externas como a las biotas re- manentes en si. Hay unafuerte necesidadpara el desarrollo de un enfoque integrado en el manejo de tierras que coloca a las reservaspara la conservacion en el contexto del terreno en general. the original vegetation has been removed (Saunders et al. 1987a). Remnants often have been called habitat is- lands and the changes that result from the isolation of these islands have been the subject of considerable de- bate in the literature. This debate has centered mostly on the equilibrium theory of island biogeography (Mac- Arthur & Wilson 1963, 1967) and its applicability to conservation. In particular, the importance of size, shape, and design of single reserves and reserve systems, extinction and colonization rates, and species-area rela- tionships have been much discussed (Wilson & Willis 1975; Diamond 1975, 1976; May 1975; Terborgh 1976; Whitcomb et al. 1976; Simberloff & Abele 1976a4 1982; Pickett & Thompson 1978; Game 1980; Margules et al. 1982; Boecklen & Gotelli 1984). Particular attention has been paid to the question of whether one large re- serve could preserve more species than several small reserves adding up to the equivalent area of the larger reserve (the so-called SLOSS, or "single large or several small" debate; Simberloff & Abele 1976b, 1984; Gilpin & Diamond 1980; Higgs & Usher 1980; Jairvinen 1982; Willis 1984). These questions have been reviewed elsewhere (Sim- berloff 1988) and are not examined in detail here. While of theoretical interest, most of these issues are of little practical value in managing fragmented systems (Zim- merman & Bierragaard 1986; Margules 1987; Hobbs 1988; Margules & Stein 1989). The species-area equa- tion, for example, may give a manager a rough idea of how many species will be maintained on a remnant of a given area, but will yield absolutely no information on the practical issue of which habitats contribute most to species richness or on which species are most likely to be lost from the remnant. Simberloff ( 1986) stated, "It is also sad that unwarranted focus on the supposed lessons of island biogeography theory has detracted from the main task of refuge planners, determining what habitats are important and how to maintain them." Margules (1986), in a discussion about two conservation evalua- tion exercises, notes that, "no panel members in either exercise considered the species-area relationship or the equilibrium theory of island biogeography in their eval- uations; at least not explicitly." In addition, the debates about reserve design and SLOSS are of limited relevance because, with very few exceptions, managers of conser- Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 20 Consequences of Fragmentaton Saunders et a). vation reserves are faced with a fait accompli. Conser- vation considerations have rarely been taken into ac- count during the development of areas for agriculture, mining, forestry, or other such uses. Conservation man- agers must work with the remnants left following these developments and virtually never have the opportunity to design a reserve network before an area is frag- mented. There is an increasing need to utilize design .criteria to improve conservation networks in already fragmented areas, but this requires a clear understand- ing of the problems created by fragmentation in the first place. Hence we believe that research and discussion should focus on practical issues relating to the impact of frag- mentation on natural ecosystems and managing rem- nants for conservation (Saunders et al. 1987b). We share the fear of Noss and Harris (1986) that conserva- tion agencies have not realized the important biological consequences of ecosystem fragmentation and have therefore not developed policies to manage their rem- nants to maintain conservation values. The aim of this paper is to point out the physical effects of fragmenta- tion, the biological consequences for natural ecosys- tems of these effects, and the options available for con- servation research and management. Characteristics of Fragmented Ecosystems Fragmentation of the landscape produces a series of remnant vegetation patches surrounded by a matrix of different vegetation and/or land use. Two primary ef- fects of this are an alteration of the microclimate within and surrounding the remnant and the isolation of each area from other remnant patches in the surrounding landscape. Thus, in a fragmented landscape there are changes in the physical environment as well as biogeo- graphic changes. Most discussions of habitat fragmenta- tion have concentrated on the biogeographic aspects, and the physical changes have received little attention. All remnants are exposed to these physical and biogeo- graphic changes to a greater or lesser degree, but their effects are modified by the size, shape, and position in the landscape of individual remnants. We examine first the physical effects of fragmentation and then discuss the operation of the modifying factors. Changes in Microclimate Fragmentation of the landscape results in changes in the physical fluxes across the landscape. Alterations in fluxes of radiation, wind, and water can all have impor- tant effects on remnants of native vegetation. 1. RADIATION FLUXES The energy balance of a fragmented landscape will differ markedly from one with a complete cover of native veg- etation, especially where the native vegetation was dense before clearing. Removing native vegetation and replacing it with crop species with differing architec- ture and phenology alters the radiation balance by in- creasing the solar radiation reaching the ground surface during the day, changing the albedo, and increasing re- radiation at night. These features vary depending on time of year; ploughing, crop growth, and harvesting produce an alternation of bare ground and varying de- grees of vegetation cover (Geiger 1965; Milthorpe & Moorby 1974). In cleared areas, in general, daytime temperatures are higher and night temperatures lower than in naturally vegetated areas. This leads to greater temperature ranges both at the surface and in the upper layers of the soil, and an increased incidence of frost (Geiger 1965). These changes in the cleared parts of the landscape impinge on the remnant native vegetation, especially at the edge between the two. Except near the equator, the orientation of the edge affects the degree to which solar radiation increases within a remnant at different times of year (Geiger 1965; Wales 1972; Ranney et al. 1981). Latitude also affects radiation input, and at high latitudes especially, where solar angles are low, a remnant edge can receive significantly more solar radiation than un- fragmented areas receive (De Walle & McGuire 1973; Hutchinson & Matt 1976,1977). Air temperatures at the edge of a forest remnant can be significantly higher than those found in either the interior of the remnant or the surrounding agricultural land (Geiger 1965; Kapos 1989). The consequences of increasing solar radiation at the edges of remnants are not clear. The indications are, however, that a different suite of species may come to occupy this altered habitat. Lovejoy et al. (1986) report that fragmentation in tropical forests results in the rapid growth of vines and other secondary vegetation in a 10-25 m strip around the remnant edge. This may ef- fectively seal off the remnant and maintain an environ- ment within the remnant similar to that that existed prior to fragmentation (F. Crome, personal communica- tion). This also occurs to some extent in temperate re- gions (Gysel 1951; Trimble & Tryon 1966; Ranney et al. 1981). Shade-tolerant species may become restricted to the interior parts of the remnant, with different species re- quiring different distances from the edge. The compo- sition of remnant edges may be affected by edge aspect (Wales 1972; Palik & Murphy 1990). Distinct sets of "interior" and "edge" species have been recognized in landscapes that have been fragmented for a long time, for instance in the eastern United States (Ranney et al. 1981). Nutrient cycling processes may be affected by in- creased soil heating and its effect on soil microorganism Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 Saunders et aW. Consequences of Fragmentation 21 and invertebrate numbers and activity (Klein 1989; Parker 1989), on litter decomposition, and on soil mois- ture retention. Changes in the radiation balance also affect larger fauna both directly and indirectly through altering resource availability (via changes in plant growth and phenology). Lovejoy et al. (1986) attribute changes in butterfly community composition in tropical forest fragments partly to increased insolation within small remnants. Increased radiation load and dessication rates may lead to reduced foraging opportunities. Saun- ders (1982) considered that elevated temperatures in fragmented landscapes reduced the foraging time avail- able to adult Carnaby's cockatoos (Calyptorbynchusfu- nereus latirostrus) and contributed to their local ex- tinction. Alternatively, some species dependent on temperature thresholds may be able to forage for longer periods. For instance, the strongly dominant ants of the Iridomyrmex genus are known to forage only when in- solation and temperatures are high, and other ant spe- cies forage only when Iridomyrmex is absent (Green- slade & Halliday 1983; Andersen 1987). Increased insolation and ambient temperatures could then in- crease the foraging time available to Indomyrmex but reduce it for subordinate species. Altered temperature regimes can also have the effect of destabilizing competitive, predator-prey, and para- sitic interactions. Geiger (1965) quotes the example of the timber pest Ocneria monacha, which lays eggs on tree trunks. Elevated springtime temperatures on trunks at the forest edge allow larvae to emerge before their parasites, which emerge from the cooler forest floor. This gives the pest a head start and results in population buildups. 2. WIND With the removal of surrounding vegetation, the entire pattern of momentum transfer over the landscape is al- tered. As air flows from one vegetation type to another, the wind profile adjusts to the new roughness charac- teristics. When air flowing over one vegetation type comes to a boundary with a new vegetation type, the upper part of the wind profile initially retains the char- acteristics of the previous vegetation type, but the lower part takes on new characteristics reflecting the rough- ness of the new vegetation type. The wind profile does not fully equilibrate with the new vegetation for some distance. Rules of thumb for wind profile measurements give the minimum "fetch" (i.e., the minimum distance from the vegetation boundary that will ensure that the profile has taken on the characteristics of the vegetation under study) as 100-200 times the height of the vege- tation under study (Monteith 1975; Grace 1983; Jones 1983). Turbulent transfer is important for the transport of atmospheric gases, and gas fluxes above vegetation are controlled by these processes. It follows, then, that these processes must be significantly modified in rem- nant vegetation areas, where the wind profile will not be in equilibrium with the remnant vegetation (Jarvis & McNaughton 1986). Given the fetch requirements, a woodland with 20-m-tall trees would need to be at least 2-4 km wide before wind profiles would resemble those in an unfragmented situation. The implications of this for plant gas exchange and growth have not been examined, but could be significant. A more obvious effect of landscape fragmentation is that remnants are subjected to increased exposure to wind. This may result in damage to the vegetation, ei- ther through direct physical damage (Moen 1974; Grace 1977), or by increasing evapotranspiration with re- duced humidity and increased dessication (Tranquillini 1979; Lovejoy et al. 1986). Direct physical damage can take the form of wind pruning (Caborn 1957) or windthrow of trees. Distinct edge structures have been found to develop at the edges of tree plantations (Fraser 1972), and this is likely to be the case for remnant areas also (see Ranney et al. 1981 for a discussion of edge structures). Trees near the edge of recently isolated remnants are particularly at risk of windthrow since they have matured within a closed canopy and have therefore developed in the absence of strong winds and lack the necessary support mechanisms to deal with such winds. Windthrow of dominant trees results in changes in the vegetation structure and increased avail- ability of regeneration gaps, allowing recruitment, par- ticularly of pioneer or light-demanding species. In- creased litter fall through tree damage is likely to alter soil surface characteristics and hence the habitat of ground-dwelling fauna. Similarly, increased exposure to wind may remove loose bark and reduce the substrate available for bark-dwelling invertebrates, and hence also reduce their availability as a food resource. Increased wind turbulence due to clearing has been shown to affect the breeding success of birds by creating difficul- ties in landing due to wind shear and vigorous canopy movement (Brett 1989; Reville et al. 1990). In the case of tropical forests, fragmentation can result in hot, dry winds blowing into remnant areas from the surrounding cleared areas, with the probable result of increased tree mortality (Lovejoy et al. 1986) and prevention of regen- eration of species whose successful establishment re- quires humid conditions or persistent soil moisture (anzen 1986). This may also be important in the regen- eration of species in other areas, such as those with mediterranean climates, where successful establishment requires adequate soil moisture (e.g., Gordon et al. 1989; Williams & Hobbs 1989). This effect will be less- ened in cases where the edges of remnants are sealed off by rapid secondary growth. Increased wind speeds at remnant edges have the sec- ondary effect of increasing the transfer of material such as dust and seeds in from the surrounding matrix. Gei- Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 22 Consequences of Fragnentation Saunders et al. ger (1965) gives an example where particulate matter deposition at the edge of a forest remnant increased by 40% over that in the open. Transfer of nutrients by saltation of surface soil particles is also possible, and strong gradients in soil nutrient levels have been found at the edges of remnant areas (Muir 1979; Cale & Hobbs 1991). Wind can deposit seeds of nonnative species over considerable distances into remnant areas (Hobbs & Atkins 1988). Transfer of insects and disease organ- isms into remnant areas may also be increased. 3. WATER FLUX Fragmentation of the landscape results in modification of the local water regime by altering the various com- ponents of the hydrological cycle. Removal of native vegetation changes the rates of rainfall interception and evapotranspiration, and hence changes soil moisture levels (Kapos 1989). The pathways by which water pen- etrates the soil may also be markedly altered (Bormann & Likens 1979; Nulsen et al. 1986; Peck & Williamson 1987; Sharma et al. 1987; Bell 1988). Replacement of deep-rooted perennial species with herbaceous crop or pasture species leads to greatly reduced evapotranspi- ration and increased surface- and groundwater flows. The hydrological system in general becomes much less buffered with more extreme run-off events (Hornbeck 1973; Simons 1989). Increased surface water flows lead to increased erosion and transport of particulate matter (e.g., Bormann et al. 1974). Topsoil removed from high in the catchment ends up as sediment in the river sys- tem. Transport of nutrients into streams also increases (Likens et al. 1970). Rises in water tables can bring stored salts to the surface and cause secondary salinity, with considerable impacts on both remnant vegetation and the surrounding agricultural matrix (Peck 1978; Williamson et al. 1987). Movement of stored salts, nu- trients, and pesticides washed from cleared land can have significant impacts on river systems (Kendrick 1976; Karr & Schlosser 1978). The impact of these changes on an individual remnant depends greatly on its position in the landscape (Swan- son et al. 1988). Remnants at the top of a catchment can be expected to be relatively little affected by changes in water flux, whereas remnants on midslopes and valley bottoms will be more affected. Remnants in run-off areas can be expected to experience more erosion, while those in run-on areas will experience more soil deposi- tion, especially on the up-slope edge. Further impacts on remnant areas can be expected following management operations in the surrounding matrix that alter hydrological processes. Thus irrigation, water storage, or drainage may affect remnant areas. An extreme example of this is found in the fens of eastern England, where drainage has led to peat shrinkage and a drop of 4 m in land level in 130 years. Remnant areas of natural wetland now require pumping systems to retain adequate water levels (Hutchinson 1980; Rowell 1986). Changes in water fluxes and associated particulate and nutrient fluxes can have important influences on the biota of remnants. Altered patterns of erosion lead to changes in drainage patterns and the production of new substrates for plant colonization. Of particular impor- tance is the deposition of nutrient-rich material in run- on areas, which can act as a focus for invasion by species requiring disturbance and/or nutrient enrichment for successful establishment (Hobbs & Atkins 1988). Changes in surface and soil moisture levels could also lead to changes in decomposition rates, altered seed- bed characteristics, and changes in habitat for ground- dwelling fauna. Isolation Landscape fragmentation has two important conse- quences for the biota. First, there is a reduction in the total area of habitat available, with possible increased densities of surviving fauna in the remnants, and second, the habitat that is left is broken up into remnants that are isolated to varying degrees (Lovejoy et al. 1984, 1986; Haila & Hanski 1984; Wilcove et al. 1986). The time since isolation, the distance between adjacent rem- nants, and the degree of connectivity between them are all important determinants of the biotic response to fragmentation. 1. TIME SINCE ISOLlATON Upon isolation, a remnant is likely to have more species than it will be capable of maintaining, and species will be lost as the changes brought about by fragmentation take effect (Miller & Harris 1977; Miller 1978; Wilcox 1980; Harris 1984). This process of "species relaxation" is considered an inevitable consequence of area reduc- tion and isolation, on the basis of island biogeographical predictions. However, the various mechanisms by which local extinctions occur will result from the phys- ical changes discussed above and resulting changes in biotic interactions. The rate of species relaxation will differ among different taxa. The most rapid extinctions are likely in species that depend entirely on native veg- etation, those that require large territories, and those that exist at low densities. Dispersal behavior and de- mography will determine the response of individual spe- cies to fragmentation (Karieva 1987). Populations that are too small to be viable may persist for long periods simply because of the longevity of in- dividuals. For example, in remnants in the Western Aus- tralian wheatbelt, female trapdoor spiders Anidiops vil- losus can live for at least 23 years (Main 1987), and small Australian passerines of about 25 g may live over 20 years (Australian Bird Banding Scheme records). It may take several hundred years to lose some species Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 Saunders et al. Consequences of Fragmentation 23 such as long-lived trees, especially since adult plants are often less sensitive to changed environmental condi- tions than seedling and juvenile stages. Alterations in disturbance regime in remnant areas may prevent suc- cessful regeneration (Hobbs 1987; Bond et al. 1988). Presence of a species in a remnant is thus no guarantee of its continued existence there; successful reproduc- tion and recruitment are required. Managers therefore may need to examine the age structure of species on remnants to identify vulnerable species to be targeted for special management. Time since isolation will therefore determine how far down the "relaxation track" any given remnant has trav- eled. Recently isolated remnants can be expected to continue losing species; this process may continue for relatively long periods in the absence of interventive management (Soule et al. 1988; Saunders 1989). Long- isolated remnants can be expected to have lost a pro- portion of the species originally present, and gained an additional component of invading species that are capa- ble of establishing in the fragmented system. It is thus wrong to consider only species numbers and not spe- cies composition when discussing species diversity in remnant areas: species numbers can potentially increase in fragmented systems where invasive and edge species can establish, but the numbers of species originally found in the area may continue to decline (Verner 1986; Murphy 1989; Webb 1989; Harris & Scheck 1991). It is commonly assumed that at some stage the rem- nant will reequilibrate with the surrounding landscape. It is, however, questionable whether a new stable equi- librium will be reached since the equilibration process is liable to be disrupted by changing fluxes from the surrounding matrix, disturbances, and influx of new in- vasive species. The final equilibrium can be likened to an idealized endpoint that is never likely to be reached, in much the same fashion as the climatic climax is now conceptualized in succession theory. Management of remnant areas will thus be an adaptive process directed at minimizing potential future species losses. 2. DISTANCE FROM OTHER REMNANTS The ability of species to colonize a remnant depends to some extent on the distance of the remnant from other areas of native vegetation, be they other remnants or nearby uncleared areas. Colonizing ability is related to dispersal mode, with wind-dispersed and vagile species more likely to arrive at isolated remnants. However, whether such species become successful colonists de- pends on physical and biotic factors such as nutrient availability and competitive interactions (Vepsalainen & Pisarski 1982). Animal species may have the physical ability to disperse long distances, but lack the behavioral repertoire to traverse the matrix surrounding the rem- nant; the matrix becomes an effective barrier to move- ment. Organism size is also important, and 100 m over agricultural fields may be a complete barrier to dispersal for small organisms such as invertebrates (Mader 1984) and some species of bird (Saunders & de Rebeira 1991). The persistence of such species on a remnant would then depend entirely on the retention of enough suit- able habitat to maintain sufficient numbers to withstand the risks of extinction (Soule 1987a, Ewens et al. 1987). Some evidence exists that fragmentation of large popu- lations into subpopulations may decrease the risk of overall species extinction even though local extinctions may occur (Higgs 1981; Quinn & Hastings 1987). It seems likely that different species will respond differ- ently to the creation of subpopulations and that knowl- edge of the details of an organism's behavior will be necessary to predict its response (Karieva 1987; Mer- riam 1991). 3. CONNEClvmY Associated with the effects of distance is the degree to which individual remnants are connected in some way to adjacent areas. The issue of connectivity and the use- fulness of corridors connecting remnants has received increasing attention in the literature (MacClintock et al. 1977; Wegner & Merriam 1979; Baudry 1984; Forman & Baudry 1984; Merriam 1984; Harris 1984, 1985; Fah- rig & Merriam 1985; Noss & Harris 1986; Bridgewater 1987; Simberloff & Cox 1987; Noss 1987; Soule et al. 1988), and was the subject of a recent symposium (Hobbs et al. 1990; Saunders & Hobbs 1991a). Corri- dors are generally believed to provide benefits such as enhanced biotic movement, extra foraging areas, ref- uges during disturbances, and enhancement of the aes- thetic appeal of the landscape. In some areas they sig- nificantly add to the area of native vegetation left following fragmentation. Simberloff & Cox (1987) pointed out that most of the work on the value of corridors has not been sufficiently controlled to demonstrate an unequivocal role in in- creasing immigration and/or decreasing extinctions. An increasing number of studies, however, now indicate that corridors are of value for movement, at least for a subset of the biota (papers in Saunders & Hobbs, 1991a). Simberloff and Cox (1987) also discussed po- tential disadvantages of corridors, which include facili- tation of the spread of disease, pests, and fire and other disturbances, increased predation, and high costs of maintaining linear remnants with high edge:area ratios. The relative merits of corridors and their required char- acteristics (i.e., width, composition, etc.) will vary from place to place and will depend on the target species. Detailed predictions of corridor value in reducing iso- lation of remnant areas are not possible without infor- mation on the movement of individual species across the landscape. Such information is, however, difficult Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 24 Consequences of Fragnentation Saunders et al and time-consuming to collect (Saunders & de Rebeira 1991). Nevertheless, while such data are being gath- ered, we need to take the approach that corridors do have value for biotic movement and attempt to retain a good corridor network wherever possible (Harris & Scheck 1991; Saunders & Hobbs 1991b). 4. CHANGES IN THE SURROUNDING IANDSCAPE Removal of the vegetation from the area surrounding a remnant leads to the remnant becoming the only area of suitable habitat remaining for biota displaced by clear- ing. This may lead to the concentration of mobile ele- ments of the biota in the remnants (Lovejoy et al. 1986). This concentration or crowding effect may be rapid and result in supersaturation of the remnant by some spe- cies. Crowding can alter intra- and interspecific interac- tions. Competition and predation, for example, can be increased, resulting in changes in fecundity and the po- tential ultimate collapse of the population. Resource availability is also affected by overexploitation; for in- stance, increased herbivory by large herbivores such as the elephant in African reserves can lead to quite dra- matic changes in habitat (Spinage & Guiness 1971; Laws et al. 1975; Walker 1981). Supersaturation results from the influx of species na- tive to the area, but there are also potential influxes of new suites of species that have increased in abundance or established. in the surrounding landscape following fragmentation. Such species include those that have been introduced in the process of agricultural develop- ment (pasture and crop plant species and livestock), other deliberate and accidental introductions, and na- tive or migrant species that can take advantage of the new habitat conditions caused by fragmentation. Natural communities vary in their susceptibility to invasion, although there is still debate over which char- acteristics render one community more invasible than another (Fox & Fox 1986; MacDonald et al. 1986; Craw- ley 1987; Usher 1988; Rejmanek 1989). For vegetation, establishment of nonnative species seems to be en- hanced by some form of disturbance, especially if this increases the availability of a limiting resource (Hobbs 1989; Panetta & Hopkins 1991). Thus the opening of light gaps in dense forests where light was limiting could enhance invasion, whereas in nutrient-limited sys- tems, nutrient input significantly increases the perfor- mance of nonnatives, especially in conjunction with soil disturbance (Hobbs & Atkins 1988). Invasion may be restricted to the edge of remnants if disturbance factors decline with distance from edge (Cale & Hobbs 1991; Panetta & Hopkins 1991), but species with wind- or animal-dispersed seeds can establish in suitable areas within a remnant, away from the edge. Invading species can establish, for example, from seeds carried in by, or deposited in feces of, animals that feed in the area sur- rounding the remnant but use the remnant for shelter. An example from Western Australia is the Wedge-tailed Eagle (Aquila audax), which breeds or roosts in rem- nants but forages on carrion in the surrounding farm- land, bringing parts of sheep carcasses back to the roost to consume them. Wool from carcasses carries seed that is dropped under the roost tree. Nutrient input from eagle droppings and the disturbance caused by other scavanging animals provides a focus for the establish- ment of nonnative species (Saunders, personal observa- tion). Thus, even in the absence of deliberate distur- bance within remnant areas, invasions may occur. Invasive species can have significant impacts on the plant communities within remnants; for instance, invad- ing plant species can significantly alter the fuel structure and hence fire regime, and can inhibit the regeneration of native species (Wycherly 1984; Macdonald et al. 1989; Panetta & Hopkins 1991). Nonnative herbivores, including stock, can also dramatically change vegetation structure and prevent regeneration. Species that in- crease because of landscape modification can also have significant impacts on the rest of the biota. For instance, in North America increased pressure from nest preda- tors and parasites such as the Brown-headed Cowbird (Molothrus ater) has affected passerine bird popula- tions in fragmented systems (Brittingham & Temple 1983; Wilcove 1985; Andren & Angelstam 1988). Sim- ilarly, the Galah (Cacatua roseicapilla) has moved into all agricultural areas in Australia as a result of the devel- opment of cereal cropping and the provision of water- ing points for stock (Saunders et al. 1985). It now roosts in remnant woodland areas, often competing with other indigenous hole nesters (Saunders & Ingram 1987; Saunders 1990), and can damage tree foliage and bark, in extreme examples causing tree mortality. Modifying Influences 1. REMNANT SIZE The smaller a remnant is, the greater the influence ex- ternal factors are likely to have. In small remnants, ecosystem dynamics are probably driven predominantly by external rather than internal forces. Of importance here are "edge effects" (Williamson 1975; Janzen 1983; Harris 1988; Yahner 1988). Larger remnants have a big- ger core area that is unaffected by the environmental and biotic changes associated with edges. Here, we re- gard edge effects as mainly detrimental; this is opposite to the traditional view that edges and ecotones are ben- eficial to wildlife (Harris 1988). The difference is that remnant edges are created by removal of the surround- ing vegetation and place the remainder in juxtaposition with a completely altered surrounding matrix. Noss and Harris (1986) have pointed out that we do not know the minimum critical size an ecosystem needs Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 Saunders et al. Consequences of Fragmentation 25 to be to preserve its characteristic species diversity and species composition (Lovejoy & Oren 1981). In fact the "minimum dynamic area" of Pickett and Thompson (1978) or "the smallest area with a natural disturbance regime which maintains internal recolonization sources" would probably exist only in the largest con- servation parks. Larger remnants usually contain greater habitat diver- sity than smaller ones. A collection of smaller reserves may, however, cover a greater array of habitats than a single large one simply because a single large reserve will not contain all of the habitats likely to occur in a region. These arguments have been discussed in detail elsewhere and will not be pursued here. It is important, however, to recognize that the process of fragmentation is generally not random (Usher 1987). Land clearance usually occurs on a selective basis, with the best soil types being cleared first. For example, in southwest Western Australia, settlers selectively cleared wood- lands because they occurred on the heavier soils best suited for agriculture. As a result, woodland communi- ties are now poorly represented in conservation re- serves and most woodland remaining on farms is in a highly degraded state (Saunders & Hobbs 1989). Few reserves in the area are large enough to contain repre- sentative samples of all preexisting vegetation types. Kitchener et al. (1980a b, 1982) found, however, that even relatively small reserves (i.e., 30 ha) could be rich in some groups of fauna, but whether these populations are viable in the long term is debatable (see Saunders 1989). Remnant size determines the potential size of popu- lations of component species. Clearly, the number of individuals of any particular species that a given rem- nant will support depends on organism size and require- ments. The larger the remnant, the more likely it is that populations will be large and more likely to resist chance extinctions (Gilpin & Soule 1986; Soule 1987a). Retaining populations in the long term may require large population sizes (of the order of hundreds or very much greater; Shaffer 1987), although the actual num- bers required will depend on the life history and pop- ulation growth rate of the species involved. Pimm et al. (1988) confirm that over a few decades extinction risk does decrease with population size, but they found no extinctions among British island birds numbering over 18 pairs. The issue of minimum population size has been discussed extensively in the literature (see Soule 1987b), but there is still no real resolution as to what constitutes a minimum viable population. There has been extensive modeling of the concept, but little ex- perimental work. Larger populations tend to have higher levels of het- erozygosity than small isolated populations. Current thinking is that heterozygosity is beneficial. Species that have gone through genetic "bottlenecks" are likely to suffer a reduction in heterozygosity with consequent loss of ability to adapt to changing conditions. Species isolated on remnants may go through such genetic bot- tlenecks because of small population sizes, and deliber- ate transfer of individuals between populations may be required (Boecklen & Bell 1987). However, the general assumption that heterozygosity is essential for long term population viability is still open to debate. Large reserves may have some disadvantages; in par- ticular, the possibility of disease spreading through en- tire populations on a large reserve has been discussed. However, there is a wide range of species' life histories and distribution patterns in the biota, and the effects of reserve size are largely species-specific. Species that have large area requirements or that require combina- tions of different habitats are likely to survive only in relatively large areas, whereas organisms with small, lo- calized populations and simple habitat requirements can survive on smaller remnants. However, all will be af- fected by the disruption of physical ecosystem pro- cesses that result from fragmentation and were dis- cussed earlier. 2. SHAPE The shape of a remnant is important only for relatively small areas; there is some size beyond which shape does not really matter. However, for small remnants, shape determines the perimeter:core (or edge:interior) ratio. Long, thin remnants have proportionally much more edge than square or round remnants (Diamond 1975; Wilson & Willis 1975), and are more open to detrimen- tal edge effects. However, some vegetation types, such as riparian strips, are naturally thin, and corridors are by definition generally long thin remnants (although the wider they are the more useful they may be to aid move- ment of biota; Saunders & Hobbs 199 lb). Long, thin remnants may also, depending on their orientation, lie along environmental gradients and thus contain more vegetation types and habitats than a square reserve of similar area. Linear features are thus part of the natural and fragmented landscape, and there is no point in try- ing to develop optimal design principles that do not take them into account; the most important question is how to manage the remnants, whatever shape they are, so as to minimize external effects. 3. POSITION IN LANDSCAPE The position of a remnant in the landscape has impor- tant influences on all the features so far discussed. It affects prefragmentation patterns of geomorphology, soil, and vegetation, and hence determines the structure and vegetation composition of any given remnant area. It also significantly affects postfragmentation processes. Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 26 Consequences of Fragnentation Saunders et al. For instance, there is an important distinction between remnants that are predominantly run-on versus those that are predominantly run-off. This influences not only the hydrological regime of the remnant, but also the movement of soil, nutrients, and seeds into and out of the remnant area. Lessons for Management Management of fragmented ecosystems has two basic components: (1) management of the natural system, or the internal dynamics of remnant areas, and (2) Man- agement of the external influences on the natural sys- tem. For large remnant areas, the emphasis should be on managing the internal dynamics, including, for instance, the disturbance regime and population dynamics of key organisms. For small remnants, on the other hand, man- agement should be directed primarily at controlling the external influences. Janzen (1983, 1986), however, has pointed out that external influences can be important whatever the remnant size. Since most impacts on remnant areas originate from the surrounding landscape, there is clearly a need to depart from the traditional notions of reserve manage- ment, and look instead toward integrated landscape management. It will become increasingly difficult to maintain remnants of native vegetation if the manage- ment practices in the surrounding matrix have contin- uous adverse impacts on them. Traditional reserve man- agement stops at the reserve boundary; fluxes of water, particulates, and organisms do not. Placing the conser- vation reserves firmly within the context of the sur- rounding landscape and attempting to develop comple- mentary management strategies seems to be the only way to ensure the long term viability of remnant areas (Hobbs & Saunders 1991). This has important implica- tions for land managers since it involves a radically new way of viewing management and requires that neighbor- ing land uses, and hence neighboring landowners, inter- act in a positive way. This is difficult, but not impossible, and there are encouraging examples of attempts at this type of integrated management (e.g., Fitzgerald Bio- sphere Project 1989; Bradby 1991). The landscape approach to management is also essen- tial since several remnant areas taken together may rep- resent a system over which components of the biota travel to meet habitat and food requirements. The loss of a single component of such a network could severely affect the capability of the remaining remnants to carry out the same functions, if for instance a particular spe- cies or habitat was lost. Such a network consists not only of the designated reserves, but also other remnant areas and linkages between them. The goal of conservation management usually is to maintain species diversity, and the method of achieving this is to attempt to maintain representative examples of each ecosystem or community type present before frag- mentation. To do this, we need to know the distribu- tions of species and communities and then select areas that represent them. In general, there are two possible scenarios. In the first, we have a system that is about to be fragmented and we have to design the ideal set of reserves for the area. In the second, we have an already- fragmented system that we need to make the most of. Most theories in conservation biology, including virtu- ally all the discussions of island biogeography in relation to reserves, have dealt with the first scenario, whereas it is the second scenario that we most frequently have to confront. Here we present a series of guidelines for man- agement in this situation. 1. The initial step must be to determine the minimum subset of the existing remnants that are required to rep- resent the diversity of a given region (Margules et al. 1988; Margules & Stein 1989). This requires that we have some knowledge of the distribution of species or ecosystem types. Clearly, it would be desirable to have all existing remnants available for this purpose, but in many cases this is not achievable, and there must be priorities for reserve retention or acquisition. 2. The system must then be managed to maintain the diversity of species or ecosystems. The question of whether management should be for individual species or whole ecosystems is largely irrelevant, because indi- vidual species require functioning ecosystems to sur- vive. Management guidelines will be area-specific, but the need to manage external influences is universal. 3. Priorities for management must be established. Clearly there are many problems to be tackled, and usu- ally there are limited resources available for the job. There must therefore be a clear priority ranking to en- sure that resources are deployed optimally. Problems that are likely to disrupt ecosystem processes and hence threaten the viability of a remnant area should be given high priority for treatment. 4. Continuous management is needed to maintain remnant areas in their current state, due to the constant pressure of altered internal dynamics and external in- fluences. Here again, the allocation of scarce manage- ment resources must be considered. Effort should go into maintaining some remnant areas in as near a "natural" state as possible, but it will not be feasible to do this for all remnants. There is a strong case to be made for letting some areas degrade so that they be- come less natural but are easier to manage and still re- tain some conservation value (Bridgewater 1990). This is not as radical as it may sound, since the process is ongoing in many remnant areas anyway. Once we ac- cept that many remnants now contain "synthetic" com- munities that are not likely ever to return to their pris- tine state, management priorities become easier to set. Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 Saunders et al. Consequences of Fragmentation 27 Research Requirements Research to date on fragmented ecosystems has pro- vided few answers on the issues of practical importance to management. It is just as important to set priorities for research as for management, and in the same way, research costs must be taken into account since re- sources for research are also limited. For instance, is it better to concentrate on single-species studies that can produce results with direct practical application but are very costly and time-consuming, or should we concen- trate on the community/ecosystem approach that is cheaper but may yield more equivocal results? Clearly, balanced use of both approaches is needed. We have identified a number of priority areas that require re- search effort (see also Soule & Kohm 1989). 1. A major priority is to understand the effects of ex- ternal factors. Comparisons of pre- and postfragmenta- tion systems will be particularly useful (Lovejoy et al. 1986; Margules 1987). Effects of changes in radiation and water fluxes are particularly important, as is the biotic invasion process. 2. Changes in internal processes since fragmentation also require further investigation. In particular, the in- teraction between internal and external processes is likely to be of critical importance. 3. Isolation factors need to be better understood. In particular, rates of genetic change in isolated popula- tions require study, as does the question of whether reduction in genetic variability is important. We also require more and better data on the role of corridors in allowing biotic (and hence genetic) movement in frag- mented landscapes. 4. While theoretical studies have their place, there is an urgent need for field experimentation in both man- agement and restoration. While such experiments are costly to set up, it is possible to make use of many situations that offer ready-made experiments. Our un- derstanding of succession has benefited greatly from the study of abandoned old fields, and in the same way, we can use current or past management activities as large- scale experiments; there is plenty of experimental ma- terial around (McNab 1983; Hopkins & Saunders 1987; Pimm 1986;Jordan et al. 1987; Hobbs & Hopkins 1990). Research has much to gain from a close liaison with management, especially if management operations actu- ally can be carried out as designed experiments and the results suitably monitored. Conclusions Emphasis in the literature has been on the design of nature reserves, but we are usually too late to do any- thing except try to maintain the remnants left following fragmentation. Emphasis also has been on biogeographic explanations for the patterns of species loss after frag- mentation, whereas a whole suite of physical and biotic parameters are significantly altered in the fragmented system and have significant impacts on remnant biota. In particular, the switch from predominantly internally driven to predominantly externally driven dynamics is a key factor in the fragmented system. Management and research should focus on this factor. There is a pressing need for an integrated approach that treats the land- scape as a whole instead of as a collection of separate biotic and legal entities. Acknowledgments We are grateful to Francis Crome, Harry Recher, Michael Soule, and two anonymous referees for their constructive comments on the manuscript. Literature Cited Andersen, A. N. 1987. Ant community organisation and envi- ronmental assessment. Pages 43-53 in J. D. Majer, editor. The role of invertebrates in conservation and biological survey. Department of Conservation and Land Management, Perth, Australia. Andren, H., and P. Angelstam. 1988. Elevated predation rates as an edge effect in habitat islands: experimental evidence. Ecology 69:544-547. Baudry, J. 1984. Effects of landscape structure on biological communities: the case of hedgerow network landscapes. Pages 55-65 in J. Brandt and P. Agger, editors. Proceedings of the first international seminar on methodology in landscape eco- logical research and planning. Volume 1. International Associ- ation for Landscape Ecology, Rosskilde University Center, Rosskilde, Denmark. Bell, A. 1988. Trees, water and salt-a fine balance. Ecos 58: 2-8. Boecklen, W. J., and C. W. Bell. 1987. Consequences of faunal collapse and genetic drift for the design of nature reserves. Pages 141-149 in D. A. Saunders, G. W. Arnold, A. A. Burbidge, and A. J. M. Hopkins, editors. Nature conservation: the role of remnants of native vegetation. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chip- ping Norton, Australia. Boecklen, W.J., and N.J. Gottelli. 1984. Island biogeographic theory and conservation practice: species-area or specious- area relationships? Biological Conservation 29:63-80. Bond, W. J., J. Midgley, and J. Vlok. 1988. When is an island not an island? Insular effects and their causes in fynbos shrublands. Oecologia (Berlin) 77:515-521. Bormann, F. H., and G. E. Likens. 1979. Pattern and process in a forested ecosystem. Springer, New York. Bormann, F. H., G. E. Likens, R. S. Siccama, R. S. Pierce, and J. S. Eaton. 1974. The export of nutrients and recovery of stable Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 28 Consequences of Fragnentation Saunders et al. conditions following deforestation at Hubbard Brook. Ecolog- ical Monographs 44:255-277. Bradby, K 1991. A data bank is never enough-the local ap- proach to landcare. Pages 377-385 in D. A. Saunders and R. J. Hobbs, editors. Nature conservation: the role of corridors. Sur- rey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. In press. Brett, D. 1989. Sea birds in the trees. Ecos 61:4-8. Bridgewater, P. B. 1987. Connectivity: an Australian perspec- tive. Pages 195-200 in D. A. Saunders, G. W. Arnold, A. A. Bur- bidge, and A. J. M. Hopkins, editors. Nature conservation: the role of remnants of native vegetation. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Bridgewater, P. B. 1990. The role of synthetic vegetation in present and future landscapes of Australia. Proceedings, Eco- logical Society of Australia 16:129-134. Brittingham, M. C., and S.A. Temple. 1983. Have cowbirds caused forest songbirds to decline? BioScience 33:31-35. Caborn, J. M. 1957. Shelterbelts and microclimate. Forestry Commission Bulletin 29. Her Majesty's Stationary Office, Ed- inburgh, Scotland. Cale, P., and R.J. Hobbs. 1991. Condition of roadside vegeta- tion in relation to nutrient status. Pages 353-362 in D. A. Saun- ders and R.J. Hobbs, editors. Nature conservation the role of corridors. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Crawley, M.J. 1987. What makes a community invasible? Pages 429-453 in M.J. Crawley, P.J. Edwards, and A.J. Gray, editors. Colonization, succession and stability. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, England. De Walle, D. R., and S. G. McGuire. 1973. Albedo variations of an oak forest in Pennsylvania. Agricultural Meteorology 11:107-113. Diamond, J. M. 1975. The island dilemma: lessons of modern biogeographic studies for the design of nature reserves. Bio- logical Conservation 7:129-146. Diamond, J. M. 1976. Island biogeography and conservation: strategy and limitations. Science 193:1027-1029. Ehrlich, A. H., and P. R. Ehrlich. 1987. Earth. Franklin Watts, New York. Ewens, W. J., P.J. Brockwell, J. M. Gani, and S. I. Resnick. 1987. Minimum viable population size in the presence of catastro- phes. Pages 59-68 in M. E. Soule, editor. Viable populations for conservation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, En- gland. Fahrig, L., and G. Merriam. 1985. Habitat patch connectivity and population survival. Ecology 66:1762-1768. Fitzgerald Biosphere Project. 1989. The bush comes to the city. Fitzgerald Biosphere Project, Perth, Australia. Forman, R. T. T. 1987. The ethics of isolation, the spread of disturbance, and landscape ecology. Pages 213-229 in M. G. Turner, editor. Landscape heterogeneity and disturbance. Springer, New York. Forman, R. T. T., and J. Baudry. 1984. Hedgerows and hedgerow networks in landscape ecology. Environmental Management 8:495-510. Fox, M. D., and B.J. Fox. 1986. The susceptibility of natural communities to invasion. Pages 57-66 in R. H. Groves and J.J. Burdon, editors. Ecology of biological invasions: an Australian perspective. Australian Academy of Science, Canberra, Austra- lia. Fraser, A. I. 1972. The effect of climate factors on the devel- opment of plantation forest structure. Review Papers in Forest Meteorology 1972:109-125. Game, M. 1980. Best shape for nature reserves. Nature 287:630-632. Geiger, R. 1965. The climate near the ground. Harvard Uni- versity Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Gilpin, M. E., and J. M. Diamond. 1980. Subdivision of nature reserves and the maintenance of species diversity. Nature 285:567-568. Gilpin, M. E., and M. E. Soul& 1986. Minimum viable popula- tions: processes of species extinctions. Pages 19-34 in M. E. Soule, editor. Conservation biology. The science of scarcity and diversity. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts. Gordon, D. R., J. M. Welker, J. W. Menke, and KJ. Rice. 1989. Competition for soil water between annual plants and blue oak (Quercus douglasii) seedlings. Oecologia (Berlin) 79:533- 541. Grace, J. 1977. Plant response to wind. Academic Press, Lon- don, England. Grace, J. 1983. Plant-atmosphere relationships. Chapman and Hall, London, England. Greenslade, P.J. M., and R. B. Halliday. 1983. Colony disper- sion and relationships of meat ants Iridomyrmex purpureus and allies in an arid locality in South Australia. Insectes Sociaux 30:82-99. Gysel, L. W. 1951. Borders and openings of beech-maple woodlands in southern Michigan. Journal of Forestry 49:13- 19. Haila, Y., and I. Hanski. 1984. Methodology for studying the effect of fragmentation on land birds. Annals Zoologica Fen- nica 21:393-397. Harris, L. D. 1984. The fragmented forest. Island biogeographic theory and the preservation of biotic diversity. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois. Harris, L. D. 1985. Conservation corridors: a highway system for wildlife. ENFO Report 85-5. Environmental Information Center of the Florida Conservation Foundation, Winter Park, Florida. Harris, L. D. 1988. Edge effects and conservation of biotic di- versity. Conservation Biology 2:330-332. Harris, L. D., and J. Scheck. 1991. From implications to appli- cations: the dispersal corridor principle applied to conserva- tion of biological diversity. Pages 189-220 in D. A. Saunders Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 Saunders et al. Consequences of Fragmentation 29 and R. J. Hobbs, editors. Nature conservation the role of cor- ridors. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Higgs, A.J. 1981. Island biogeographic theory and nature re- serve design. Journal of Biogeography 8:117-124. Higgs, A.J., and M. B. Usher. 1980. Should nature reserves be large or small? Nature 285:568. Hobbs, R.J. 1987. Disturbance regimes in remnants of natural vegetation. Pages 233-240 in D. A. Saunders, G. W. Arnold, A. A. Burbidge, and A. J. M. Hopkins, editors. Nature conserva- tion: the role of remnants of native vegetation. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Hobbs, R. J. 1988. What is ecological theory and is it of any use to managers? Pages 15-27 in D. A. Saunders and A. A. Bur- bidge, editors. Ecological theory and biological management of ecosystems. CALM Occasional Paper 1/88. Department of Conservation and Land Management, Perth, Australia. Hobbs, R.J. 1989. The nature and effects of disturbance rela- tive to invasions. Pages 389-405 in J. A. Drake, H. A. Mooney, F. di Castri, et al., editors. Biological invasions. A global per- spective. John Wiley & Sons, New York. Hobbs, R. J., and L. Atkins. 1988. The effect of disturbance and nutrient addition on native and introduced annuals in the Western Australian wheatbelt. Australian Journal of Ecology 13:171-179. Hobbs, R.J., and A.J. M. Hopkins. 1990. From frontier to frag- ments: European impact on Australia's vegetation. Proceed- ings, Ecological Society of Australia 16:93-114. Hobbs, R.J., and D. A. Saunders. 1991. Reintegrating frag- mented landscapes: a proposed framework for the Western Australian wheatbelt. Proc. V Aust. Soil Cons. Conf. In press. Hobbs, R.J., D. A. Saunders, and B. M. T. Hussey. 1990. Nature conservation: the role of corridors. Ambio 19:94-95. Hopkins, A.J. M., and D. A. Saunders. 1987. Ecological studies as the basis for management. Pages 15-28 in D. A. Saunders, G. W. Arnold, A. A. Burbidge, and A. J. M. Hopkins, editors. Na- ture conservation: the role of remnants of native vegetation. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Hornbeck,J. W. 1973. Storm flow from hardwood-forested and cleared watersheds in New Hampshire. Water Resources Re- search 9:346-354. Hudson, N. 1981. Soil conservation. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York. Hutchinson, B. A., and D. R. Matt. 1976. Beam enrichment of diffuse radiation in a deciduous forest. Agricultural Meteorol- ogy 17:93-1 10. Hutchinson, B. A., and D. R. Matt. 1977. The distribution of solar radiation within a deciduous forest. Ecological Mono- graphs 47:185-207. Hutchinson, J. N. 1980. The record of peat wastage in the East Anglian fenlands at Holme Post, 1848-1978 AD. Journal of Ecology 68:229 -49. Janzen, D. H. 1983. No park is an island: increase in interfer- ence from outside as park size decreases. Oikos 41:402-410. Janzen, D. H. 1986. The eternal external threat. Pages 286-303 in M. E. Soule, editor. Conservation biology. The science of scarcity and diversity. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massa- chusetts. Jarvinen, 0. 1982. Conservation of endangered plant popula- tions: single large or several small reserves? Oikos 38:301-7. Jarvis, P. G., and K G. McNaughton. 1986. Stomatal control of transpiration: scaling up from leaf to region. Advances in Eco- logical Research 15:1-4. Jones, H. G. 1983. Plants and microclimate. Cambridge Uni- versity Press, Cambridge, England. Jordan, W. R., III, M. E. Gilpin, andJ. D. Aber. 1987. Restoration ecology: ecological restoration as a technique for basic re- search. Pages 3-21 in W. R. Jordan III, M. E. Gilpin, and J. D. Aber, editors. Restoration ecology: a synthetic approach to ecological research. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England. Kapos, V. 1989. Effects of isolation on the water status of forest patches in the Brazilian Amazon. Journal of Tropical Ecology 5:173-185. Karieva, P. 1987. Habitat fragmentation and the stability of predator-prey interactions. Nature 326:388-90. Karr, J. R., and I.J. Schlosser. 1978. Water resources and the land-water interface. Science 201:229-34. Kendrick, G. W. 1976. The Avon: faunal and other notes on a dying river in south-western Australia. West Australian Natu- ralist 13:97-114. Kitchener, D. J., A. Chapman, J. Dell, B. G. Muir, and M. Palmer. 1980a. Lizard species assemblage and reserve size and struc- ture in the Western Australian wheatbelt-some implications for conservation. Biological Conservation 17:25-62. Kitchener, D. J., A. Chapman, B. G. Muir, and M. Palmer. 1980b. The conservation value for mammals of reserves in the West- ern Australian wheatbelt. Biological Conservation 18:179- 207. Kitchener, D.J., J. Dell, B. G. Muir, and M. Palmer. 1982. Birds in Western Australian wheatbelt reserves-implications for conservation. Biological Conservation 22:127-163. Klein, B. C. 1989. Effects of forest fragmentation on dung and carrion beetle communities in Central Amazonia. Ecology 70:1715-1725. Laws, R. M., I. S. C. Parker, and R. C. B. Johnstone. 1975. Ele- phants and their habitat. Clarendon Press, Oxford, England. Le Houerou, H. N., and H. Gillet. 1986. Desertization in African arid lands. Pages 44-461 in M. E. Soule, editor. Conservation biology. The science of scarcity and diversity. Sinauer Associ- ates, Sunderland, Massachusetts. Likens, G. E., F. H. Bormann, N. M. Johnson, D. W. Fisher, and R. S. Pierce. 1970. Effects of forest cutting and herbicide treat- Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 30 Consequences of Fragnentation Saunders et al. ment on nutrient budgets in the Hubbard Brook watershed- ecosystem. Ecological Monographs 40:23-47. Lovejoy, T. E., R. 0. Bierregaard, K S. Brown, L. H. Emmons, and M. E. Van der Voort. 1984. Ecosystem decay of Amazon forest fragments. Pages 295-325 in M. H. Niteki, editor. Ex- tinctions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois. Lovejoy, T. E., B. 0. Bierregaard, Jr., A. B. Rylands, et al. 1986. Edge and other effects of isolation on Amazon forest frag- ments. Pages 257-285 in M. E. Soule, editor. Conservation bi- ology. The science of scarcity and diversity. Sinauer Associ- ates, Sunderland, Massachusetts. Lovejoy, T. E., and D. C. Oren. 1981. The minimum critical size of ecosystems. Pages 7-12 in R. L. Burgess and D. M. Sharpe, editors. Forest island dynamics in man-dominated landscapes. Springer, New York. MacArthur, R. H., and E. 0. Wilson. 1963. An equilibrium the- ory of insular biogeography. Evolution 17:373-387. MacArthur, R. H., and E. 0. Wilson. 1967. The theory of island biogeography. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NewJer- sey. MacClintock, L., R. F. Whitcomb, and B. L. Whitcomb. 1977. Island biogeography and the "habitat islands" of eastern forest II. Evidence for the value of corridors and minimization of isolation in preservation of biotic diversity. American Birds 31:6-16. Macdonald, I. A. W., L. L. Loope, M. B. Usher, and 0. Hamann. 1989. Wildlife conservation and the invasion of nature re- serves by introduced species: a global perspective. Pages 215- 255 in J. A. Drake, H. A. Mooney, F. di Castri, et al., editors. Biological invasions. A global perspective. John Wiley & Sons, New York. Macdonald, I. A. W., F. J. Powrie, and W. R. Siegfried. 1986. The differential invasion of southern Africa's biomes and ecosys- tems by alien plants and animals. Pages 209-225 in I. A. W. Macdonald, F. J. Kruger, and A. A. Ferrar, editors. The ecology and management of biological invasions in Southern Africa. Oxford University Press, Cape Town, South Africa. McNab, J. 1983. Wildlife management as scientific experimen- tation. The Wildlife Society Bulletin 11:397-401. Mader, H.-J. 1984. Animal habitat isolation by roads and agri- cultural fields. Biological Conservation 29:81-96. Main, B. Y. 1987. Persistence of invertebrates in small areas: case studies of trapdoor spiders in Western Australia. Pages 29-39 in D.A. Saunders, G. W. Arnold, A.A. Burbidge, and A. J. M. Hopkins, editors. Nature conservation: the role of rem- nants of native vegetation. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Margules, C. R. 1986. Conservation evaluation in practice. Pages 297-314 in M. B. Usher, editor. Wildlife conservation evaluation. Chapman and Hall, London, England. Margules, C. R. 1987. The Wog Wog habitat patch experiment: Background, objectives, experimental design and sample strat- egy. Technical Memorandum 85/18. CSIRO, Division of Water and Land Resources, Canberra, Australia. Margules, C. R., A.J. Higgs, and R. W. Rafe. 1982. Modem bio- geographic theory: are there any lessons for nature reserve design? Biological Conservation 24:115-128. Margules, C. R., A. 0. Nicholls, and R. L. Pressey. 1988. Select- ing networks of reserves to maximise biological diversity. Bi- ological Conservation 43:63-76. Margules, C. R., andJ. L. Stein. 1989. Patterns and distributions of species and the selection of nature reserves: an example from Eucalyptus forests in south-eastern New South Wales. Biological Conservation 50:219-238. May, R. M. 1975. Island biogeography and the design of wild- life preserves. Nature 245:177-178. Merriam, G. 1984. Connectivity: a fundamental ecological characteristic of landscape pattern. Pages 5-15 in J. Brandt and P. Agger, editors. Proceedings of the First International Semi- nar on Methodology in Landscape Ecological Research and Planning. International Association for Landscape Ecology, Rosskilde University Center, Rosskilde, Denmark. Merriam, G. 1991. Corridors for connectivity: animal popula- tions in heterogeneous environments. Pages 133-142 D. A. Saunders and R.J. Hobbs, editors. Nature conservation: the role of corridors. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Miller, R. I. 1978. Applying island biogeographic theory to an East African reserve. Environmental Conservation 5:191-195. Miller, R. I., and L. D. Harris. 1977. Isolation and extirpations in wildlife reserves. Biological Conservation 12:311-315. Milthorpe, F. L., andJ. Moorby. 1974. An introduction to crop physiology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England. Moen, A. N. 1974. Turbulence and the visualization of wind flow. Ecology 55:1420-1424. Monteith, J. L. 1975. Vegetation and the atmosphere. Volume 1. Principles. Academic Press, London, England. Muir, B. G. 1979. Observations of wind-blown superphosphate in native vegetation. West Australian Naturalist 14:128-130. Murphy, D. D. 1989. Conservation and confusion: wrong spe- cies, wrong scale, wrong conclusions. Conservation Biology 3:82-84. Myers, N. 1988. Tropical forests and their species: going, going ... ? Pages 28-35 in E. 0. Wilson and F. M. Peter, editors. Bio- diversity. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. Noss, R. F. 1987. Corridors in real landscapes: a reply to Sim- berloff and Cox. Conservation Biology 1:159-164. Noss, R. F., and L. D. Harris. 1986. Nodes, networks and MUMs: preserving diversity at all scales. Environmental Management 10:299-309. Nulsen, R. A., K J. Bligh, I. N. Baxter, E. J. Solin, and D. H. Imrie. 1986. The fate of rainfall in a mallee and heath vegetated catchment in southern Western Australia. Australian Journal of Ecology 11:361-371. Palik, B.J., and P. G. Murphy. 1990. Disturbance versus edge effects in sugar-maple/beech forest fragments. Forest Ecology and Management 32:187 -202. Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 Saunders et al. Consequences of Fragmentation 31 Panetta, D., and A.J. M. Hopkins. 1991. Weeds in corridors: invasion and management. Pages 341-351 in D.A. Saunders and R. J. Hobbs, editors. Nature conservation the role of cor- ridors. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Parker, C. A. 1989. Soil biota and plants in the rehabilitation of degraded agricultural soils. Pages 423-438 in J. D. Majer, ed- itor. Animals in primary succession. The role of fauna in re- claimed lands. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, En- gland. Peck, A.J. 1978. Salinisation of non-irrigated soils and associ- ated streams: a review. Australian Journal of Soil Research 16:157-168. Peck, A.J., and D. R. Williamson. 1987. Effects of forest clear- ing on groundwater. Journal of Hydrology 94:47-66. Pickett, S. T. A., andJ. N. Thompson. 1978. Patch dynamics and the size of nature reserves. Biological Conservation 13:27-37. Pimm, S. A. 1986. Community stability and structure. Pages 309-329 in M. E. Soule, editor. Conservation biology. The sci- ence of scarcity and diversity. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts. Pimm, S. A., H. L. Jones, and J. Diamond. 1988: On the risk of extinction. American Naturalist 132:757-785. Quinn, J. F., and A. Hastings. 1987. Extinction in subdivided habitats. Conservation Biology 1:198-208. Ranney, J. W., M. C. Bruner, and J. B. Levenson. 1981. The im- portance of edge in the structure and dynamics of forest is- lands. Pages 67-95 in R. L. Burgess and D. M. Sharpe, editors. Forest island dynamics in man-dominated landscapes. Springer, New York. Rejm'anek, M. 1989. Invasibility of plant communities. Pages 369-388 inJ. A. Drake, H. A. Mooney, F. di Castri, et al. editors. Biological invasions. A global perspective. John Wiley & Sons, New York. Reville, B. J., J. D. Tranter, and H. D. Yorkston. 1990. Impact of forest clearing on the endangered seabird, Sula abbotti. Bio- logical Conservation 51:23-38. Rowell, T. A. 1986. The history of drainage at Wicken Fen, Cambridgeshire, England, and its relevance to conservation. Biological Conservation 35:111-142. Saunders, D. A. 1982. The breeding behaviour and biology of the short-billed form of the White-tailed Black Cockatoo Ca- lyptorhynchus funereus. Ibis 124:422-455. Saunders, D. A. 1989. Changes in the avifauna of a region, dis- trict and remnant as a result of fragmentation of native vege- tation: the wheatbelt of Western Australia. A case study. Bio- logical Conservation 50:99-135. Saunders, D. A. 1990. Problems of survival in an extensively cultivated landscape: the case of Carnaby's Cockatoo Calyp- torhynchus funereus latirostris. Biological Conservation 54:111-124. Saunders, D. A., G. W. Arnold, A. A. Burbidge, and A. J. M. Hop- kins. 1987a. The role of remnants of native vegetation in na- ture conservation: future directions. Pages 387-392 in D. A. Saunders, G. W. Arnold, A. A. Burbidge, and A. J. M. Hopkins, editors. Nature conservation: the role of remnants of native vegetation. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Austra- lia. Saunders, D. A., G. W. Arnold, A. A. Burbidge, and A.J. M. Hop- kins, editors. 1987b. Nature conservation: the role of remnants of native vegetation. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Saunders, D., and R. Hobbs. 1989. Corridors for conservation. New Scientist 1642:63-68. Saunders, D. A., and R.J. Hobbs, editors. 199 la. Nature con- servation: the role of corridors. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chip- ping Norton, Australia. In press. Saunders, D. A., and R.J. Hobbs. 1991b. The role of corridors in nature conservation: what do we know and where do we go? Pages 421-427 in D. A. Saunders and R.J. Hobbs, editors. Nature conservation: the role of corridors. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Saunders, D. A., A. J. M. Hopkins, and R. A. How, editors. 1990. Australian ecosystems: 200 years of utilisation, degradation and reconstruction. Proceedings of the Ecological Society of Australia 16. Saunders, D. A., and J. A. Ingram. 1987. Factors affecting sur- vival of breeding populations of Carnaby's cockatoo Calypto- rhynchus funereus latirostris in remnants of native vegeta- tion. Pages 249-258 in D. A. Saunders, G. W. Arnold, A. A. Burbidge, and A. J. M. Hopkins, editors. Nature conservation: the role of remnants of native vegetation. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Saunders, D. A., and C. P. de Rebeira. 1991. Values of corridors to avian populations in a fragmented landscape. Pages 221- 244 in D. A. Saunders and R. J. Hobbs, editors. Nature conser- vation the Role of Corridors. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Saunders, D. A., I. Rowley, and G. T. Smith. 1985. The effects of clearing for agriculture on the distribution of cockatoos in the south west of Western Australia. Pages 309-321 in A. Keast, H. F. Recher, H. Ford, and D. Saunders, editors. Birds of euca- lypt forests and woodlands: ecology, conservation, manage- ment. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Shaffer, M. 1987. Minimum viable populations: coping with uncertainty. Pages 69-86 in M. E. Soule, editor. Viable popu- lations for conservation. Cambridge University Press, Cam- bridge, England. Sharma, M. L., R. J. W. Barron, and D. R. Williamson. 1987. Soil water dynamics of lateritic catchments as affected by forest clearing for pasture. Journal of Hydrology 94:109-127. Simberloff, D. 1986. Design of nature reserves. Pages 315-37 in M. B. Usher, editor. Wildlife conservation evaluation. Chap- man and Hall, London, England. Simberloff, D. 1988. The contribution of population and com- munity biology to conservation science. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 19:473-511. Simberloff, D. S., and L. G. Abele. 1976a. Island biogeography and conservation: strategy and limitations. Science 193:1032. Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 32 Consequences of Fragnentation Saunders et al. Simberloff, D. S., and L. G. Abele. 1976b. Island biogeography theory and conservation practice. Science 191:285-286. Simberloff, D., and L. G. Abele. 1982. Refuge design and island biogeographic theory: effects of fragmentation. American Nat- uralist 120:41-50. Simberloff, D., and L. G. Abele. 1984. Conservation and obfus- cations: subdivision of reserves. Oikos 42:399-401. Simberloff, D., and J. Cox. 1987. Consequences and costs of conservation corridors. Conservation Biology 1:63-71. Simons, P. 1989. Nobody loves a canal with no water. New Scientist 1685:30-34. Soule, M. E. 1987a. Introduction. Pages 1-10 in M. E. Soule, editor. Viable populations for conservation. Cambridge Uni- versity Press, Cambridge, England. Soule, M. E., editor. 1987b. Viable populations for conserva- tion. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England. Soule, M. E., D. T. Bolger, A. C. Alberts, J. Wright, M. Sorice, and S. Hill. 1988. Reconstructed dynamics of rapid extinctions of chaparral-requiring birds in urban habitat islands. Conserva- tion Biology 2:75-92. Soule, M. E., and K A. Kohm. 1989. Research priorities for con- servation biology. Island Press, Washington, D.C. Spinage, C. A., and F. E. Guiness. 1971. Tree survival in the absence of elephants in the Akagera National Park, Rwanda. Journal of Applied Ecology 8:723-728. Swanson, F. J., T. K Kratz, N. Caine, and R. G. Woodmansee. 1988. Landform effects on ecosystem patterns and processes. BioScience 38:92-98. Terborgh, J. 1976. Island biogeography and conservation: strategy and limitations. Science 193:1029-1030. Tranquillini, W. 1979. Physiological ecology of the alpine tim- berline; tree existence at high altitudes with special reference to the European Alps. Springer, New York. Trimble, G. R., and E. H. Tryon. 1966. Crown encroachment into openings cut in Appalachian hardwood stands. Journal of Forestry 64:104-108. Usher, M. B. 1987. Effects of fragmentation on communities and populations: a review with applications to wildlife conser- vation. Pages 103-121 in D.A. Saunders, G. W. Arnold, A.A. Burbidge, and A. J. M. Hopkins, editors. Nature conservation: the role of remnants of native vegetation. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, Australia. Usher, M. B. 1988. Biological invasions of nature reserves: a search for generalisations. Biological Conservation 44:119-135. Vepsalailnen, K, and B. Pisarski. 1982. Assembly of island ant communities. Annals Zoologica Fennici 19:327-335. Verner, J. 1986. Predicting effects of habitat patchiness and fragmentation-the researcher's viewpoint. Pages 327-329 in J. Verner, M.L. Morrison, and C.J. Ralph, editors. Wildlife 2000: modeling habitat relationships of terrestrial vertebrates. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, Wisconsin. Wales, B. A. 1972. Vegetation analysis of north and south edges in a mature oak-hickory forest. Ecological Monographs 42:451-471. Walker, B. H. 1981. Is succession a viable concept in African savannah ecosystems? Pages 431-447 in D. C. West, H. H. Shugart, and D. B. Botkin, editors. Forest succession: concepts and application. Springer, New York. Webb, N. R. 1989. Studies on the invertebrate fauna of frag- mented heathiand in Dorset, U.K, and the implications for conservation. Biological Conservation 47:153-165. Wegner, J. F., and G. Merriam. 1979. Movements by birds and small mammals between a wood and adjoining farmland hab- itats. Journal of Applied Ecology 16:349-357. Whitcomb, R. F., J. F. Lynch, P. A. Opler, and C. S. Chandler. 1976. Island biogeography and conservation: strategy and lim- itation. Science 193:1030-1032. Wilcove, D. S. 1985. Nest predation in forest tracts and the decline of migratory songbirds. Ecology 66:1211-1214. Wilcove, D. S., C. H. McLellan, and A. P. Dobson. 1986. Habitat fragmentation in the temperate zone. Pages 273-256 in M. E. Soule, editor. Conservation biology. The science of scarcity and diversity. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts. Wilcox, B. A. 1980. Insular ecology and conservation. Pages 95-117 in M. E. Soule and B. A. Wilcox, editors. Conservation Biology an Evolutionary-Ecological Perspective. Sinauer, Sun- derland, Massachusetts. Williams, K, and R.J. Hobbs. 1989. Control of shrub establish- ment by springtime soil water availability in an annual grass- land. Oecologia (Berlin) 81:62--66. Williamson, D. R., R. A. Stokes, and J. K Ruprecht. 1987. Re- sponse of input and output of water and chloride to clearing for agriculture. Journal of Hydrology 94:1-28. Williamson, M. 1975. The design of nature preserves. Nature (London) 256:519. Willis, E. 0. 1984. Conservation, subdivision of reserves and the anti-dismemberment hypothesis. Oikos 42:396-398. Wilson, E. O., and E. 0. Willis. 1975. Applied biogeography. Pages 522-34 in M. L. Cody and J. M. Diamond, editors. Ecol- ogy and evolution of communities. Belknap Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Wycherly, P. 1984. People, fire and weeds: can the vicious spiral be broken? Pages 11-17 in S. A. Moore, editor. The man- agement of small bush areas in the Perth metropolitan region. Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, Perth, Australia. Yahner, R. H. 1988. Changes in wildlife communities near edges. Conservation Biology 2:333 - 339. Zimmerman, B. L., and R. 0. Bierragaard. 1986. Relevance of the equilibrium theory of island biogeography and species area relations to conservation with a case from Anazonia. Journal of Biogeography 13:133 -143. Conservation Biology Volume 5, No. 1, March 1991 Article Contents p. 18 p. 19 p. 20 p. 21 p. 22 p. 23 p. 24 p. 25 p. 26 p. 27 p. 28 p. 29 p. 30 p. 31 p. 32 Issue Table of Contents Conservation Biology, Vol. 5, No. 1 (Mar., 1991), pp. 1-132 Front Matter [pp. ] Editorial: Conservation and the Rights of Animals [pp. 1-3] News of the Society [pp. 4] Letters [pp. 5-8] Conservation Education Education and Empowerment: Conservation Lessons from Children [pp. 9-10] Politics, Conservation, and Public Education [pp. 10-12] International Conservation News Nature Conservation and Sustainable Development in Cuba [pp. 13-16] Announcements [pp. 16-17] Biological Consequences of Ecosystem Fragmentation: A Review [pp. 18-32] Inbreeding Depression in a Captive Wolf (Canis lupus) Population [pp. 33-40] Conservation Genetics of the Endangered Isle Royale Gray Wolf [pp. 41-51] Trilepidea adamsii: An Obituary for a Species [pp. 52-57] Nested Subsets and the Distribution of Birds on Isolated Woodlots [pp. 58-66] Tropical Forest Fragmentation and the Local Extinction of Understory Birds in the Eastern Usambara Mountains, Tanzania [pp. 67-78] Ecological Correlates of Extinction Proneness in Australian Tropical Rain Forest Mammals [pp. 79-89] Long Term Changes in the Relative Abundances of Birds in Kings Park, Perth, Western Australia [pp. 90-102] Measurement of Genetic Variation in Endangered Populations: Bandicoots (Marsupialia: Peramelidae) as an Example [pp. 103-108] Financial Considerations of Reserve Design in Countries with High Primate Diversity [pp. 109-114] Note Effect of Population Size on Genetic Variation in a Dioecious Conifer [pp. 115-119] Comment Sustainability and Wilderness [pp. 120-122] Diversity Risk Analysis for Conservation Biologists [pp. 123-125] Book Reviews Logging, Conservation, and Native Rights in Sarawak Forests [pp. 126-130] Forest Management: Perspectives from Southeast Asia [pp. 131] Thai Red Data Book [pp. 131-132] Back Matter [pp. ]