6-Chapter-5.indd Chapter 5 RADIATION CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIC SOLIDS Cornelia Vasile, Elena Butnaru “Petru Poni” Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry, Romanian Academy, 41A Grigore Ghica Voda Alley, 700487 Iasi, Romania 1. INTRODUCTION Radiation chemistry deals with chemical reactions produced by interactions of ionizing radiation with materials. The effects of radiation on matter depend on the type of the radiation and its energy level, as well as on the composition, physical state, temperature and the atmospheric environment of the absorbing material. The type and yield of the fi nal products produced by exposure of an organic compound to ionizing radiation are often dependent on its physical state (gas, liquid or solid) and its molecular structure [1]. The effects of radia- tion on organic solids (polymers, lignocellulosic materials, etc.) are an area of increasing interest. Ionizing radiation can modify the physical, chemical, and biological properties of polymers; the changes occurring when polymer mate- rials are in a solid state are different, as compared to chemical or thermal reac- tions carried out in melted polymers. After the interaction of ionizing radiation (gamma rays, X-rays, accelerated electrons, ion beams) with macromolecules, very reactive intermediates (primary entities, radicals and ions) are formed. These intermediates can follow several different reaction paths, that result in the formation of oxidized products, grafts, scissioning of main chains (degrada- tion) or crosslinking. The type and degree of these transformations depend on the structure of the material (e.g. polymer) and the treatment applied before, during and after irradiation [2]. 118 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing 2. PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EFFECTS Ionizing radiations can be classifi ed in three categories: • charged particles: electrons (e–), positrons (e+), and heavy ions; • photons: gamma (γ), X-rays and light; • neutrons (n). The term “ionizing radiation” in a wider sense also applies to photons or particles having suffi cient energy to ionize a molecule of a material. This in- volves photons with energies ranging from the fi rst ionization energy of the material (~10 eV) up to several million eV (MeV), as well as energetic charged particles, such as electrons, positrons, accelerated heavy ions, etc. The result of such energy absorption is the breaking or rearrangement of chemical bonds, i.e. decomposition of some of the initial material. Radiation principles explain how the gamma rays, electron beams (EB) and X-rays interact with matter. Independently from the type of radiation (electromagnetic or particle) most of the radiation effects are produced by secondary electrons. According to calculations by Bethe with primary electrons of 103-15 eV more than 80% of the absorbed energy is transferred to secondary electrons. These interactions result in the formation of energetic electrons which are random throughout the materials and which cause the formation of energetic molecular ions. These ions may be subject to electron capture and dissociation, as well as to rapid rearrangement through ion-molecule reactions, or they may dissociate with time depending on the complexity of the molecular ion. The chemical changes in matter can occur via primary radiolysis effects, which occur as a result of the adsorption of the energy by the absorbing matter, or via secondary effects, which occur as a result of the high reactivity of the free radicals or electrons and the excited ions or molecules produced as a result of the primary effects. These highly reactive intermediates can undergo a variety of reactions leading to stable chemical products. In general, these chemical products can be detected and are referred to as radiolysis products. Understand- ing gamma-ray interaction with matter is important from the perspective of shielding against their effects on biological matter. These chemical changes can ultimately have biological consequences in the case where the target ma- terials include living organisms. The main types of interactions of gamma and X-radiation with substances are the photoeffect both in its photoelectric and photonuclear forms, Compton effect and scattering and generation and/or annihilation (elastic collisions) of the pairs (electron positron pair production). To a minor extent, photofi ssion, Rayleigh scattering and Thompson scattering also occur [3]. The photoelectric effect can displace atomic electrons, whereas the photonuclear reaction would displace elementary particles from the nucleus. Chapter 5 119 Photoelectric effect is the most effective mechanism of photon absorption, as shown in Fig.1. The photoelectric effect occurs in two stages. First, a photon (a) removes a bound electron in one atom. In the case of gamma photons, it is usually an electron belonging to the innermost atomic shells, L or K (as shown in Fig.1). Then the atom that has lost one of its inner electrons is left in an excited state. An electron from an outer layer ((b) in Fig.1) moves to occupy the vacancy left by the ejected electron. If the ejected electron belonged to the K shell, an X-ray is emitted during this transition which is accompanied by the emission of a characteristic soft electromagnetic radiation in the X-ray, ultraviolet (UV) or visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The photoelectric effect is the phenomenon that transforms light, infrared and ultraviolet rays into electricity in solar panels and photodiodes of cameras. It is also involved in the completely different fi eld of radioprotection by trans- forming penetrating X- and gamma rays into electrons easy to stop and thus protects humans from the effects of these radiations. The photoelectric process is always accompanied by a secondary emission since the atom cannot remain in an excited state indefi nitely, thus: • The atom emits X-rays and returns to the ground state. • Auger electrons are emitted from the outer electronic shells carrying out the excitation energy. The secondary radiation is also later absorbed and occurs in scintillators used in gamma radiation detection. The photoelectric effect is the most effective physical phenomenon in mitigating these radiations. The gamma-ray or X-ray photon absorbed by interact- Fig.1. Schematic representation of photoelectric effect. Gamma absorption by an atom 120 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing ing with a bound electron to form an atom radical () disappears. The photon simply vanishes. If the energy of the photon is greater than 0.339 MeV, an electron may be ejected from the atom producing an ion pair. The ejected elec- tron will then produce secondary ionization events in its surrounding atoms in a similar manner to beta particles (electrons or positrons). The photoelectric effect has a high probability of occurring with lower energy photons and atoms having high atomic numbers. The shell structure of atoms plays a crucial role. The photon removes an electron only if its energy exceeds the binding energy of the electron on its shell. The probability (called cross section) of removing an electron from a shell becomes different from zero beyond this threshold. Where there is a certain small probability of a photoelectric effect type phe- nomenon, gamma rays tend to interact more with not only deeper, core-level energy states, but also with the nucleus of the material. In this case, a number of different phenomena go on such as nuclear excitation, different types of scattering, etc. [4]. Photonuclear reactions can be used to produce neutron sources which can be used in a variety of applications such as nuclear medicine and radiography. In the Compton effect, the photon undergoes a collision with an atom thus being deviated from its trajectory and releasing part of its energy. This energy is usually enough to abstract an electron from the atom. Compton scattering is the inelastic scattering of a photon by a charged particle, usually an electron. It results in a decrease in energy (increase in wavelength) of the photon (which may be an X-ray or gamma-ray photon). This is called the Compton effect. The electrons in matter are neither free nor at rest. However, in some cases, one can approximate the state of an electron in a simple model as free and at rest. In this case a gamma rays can interact with a loosely bound electron by being scattered with an appropriate loss in energy, as illustrated in Fig.2. The scattering of photons from charged particles is called Compton scat- tering after Arthur Compton, who was the fi rst to measure photon-electron Fig.2. Compton scattering. Chapter 5 121 scattering in 1922. When the incoming photon gives part of its energy to an electron, then the scattered photon has lower energy and according to the Planck relationship has a lower frequency and longer wavelength. The wavelength change in such scattering depends only upon the scattering angle for a given target particle. The constant in the Compton formula (Eq. (1)) can be written as in Eq. (2) and is called the Compton wavelength for the electron: (1) (2) where: λi – the initial wavelength, λf – the wavelength after scattering, h – the Planck constant, mo – the electron rest mass, c – the speed of light, and θ – the scattering angle. Part of the energy of the photon is transferred to the recoiling electron. Inverse Compton scattering also exists, in which a charged particle transfers part of its energy to a photon. Compton scattering is of prime importance in radiobiology, as it is the most probable interaction of gamma rays and high energy X-rays with atoms in living cells and is applied in radiation therapy. In material physics, Compton scattering can be used to probe the wave function of the electrons in matter. The primary effect of the Compton interaction is ionization. 3. CHEMICAL EFFECTS OF RADIATIONS The primary effect of high energy radiation is ionization and, to a minor extent, excitation of molecules and atoms. The radiation gradually releases its energy through the material giving rise to a track of reactive species (ions, excited molecules, radicals, electrons) whose reactions are responsible for the irrevers- ible chemical transformations of the matter (radiolysis). Primary ionization generates electrons, whose energy is large enough to give rise to further ioniza- tions and excitations. Thus, secondary electrons are responsible for a major part of radiation chemical effects. This explains the substantial analogy of the effects stemming from the different type of radiations either electromagnetic (gamma rays, X-rays) or charged particles (electrons, alpha, protons, deuterons, etc.). The probability that electrons with energy < 10 MeV and gamma radia- tions of 0.5-1 MeV (Compton effect) will interact with atoms and molecules is proportional to the electron density of the material and it is therefore rela- tively unselective and largely independent of chemical structures. A general radiolysis mechanism for a condensed phase is illustrated in Fig.3. f i o h (1 cos ) m c         122 e e h hc 1240 eV nm 0.00243 nm 2.43 10 m m c m c 0.511 MeV     122 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing This consists of excitation radiolysis and ionic radiolysis pathways depend- ing on the type of active species generated. The free radicals are the most im- portant intermediates in all radiolysis processes. The excited species in con- densed systems can undergo: (i) fast internal conversion (10–13 s) to the lowest excited levels with degradation to thermal energy of most of the electronic excitation energy, (ii) chemical reactions, (iii) return to the fundamental state of the same multiplicity with emission of radiation, (iv) fl uorescence or (v) return to the fundamental state after intersystem crossing (ISC) with emission of phosphorescence radiation. The primary processes in the radiolysis of or- Fig.3. General radiolysis scheme (A) and primary processes in the radiolysis of organic compounds (B): R and S – free radicals; S+ and S– – cation or anion radicals, respec- tively; ISC – intersystem crossing; IC – internal conversion; R+ and R– – diamagnetic cation or anion, respectively; MP, M and N – molecular products. B A Chapter 5 123 ganic compounds can, in most cases, be represented by excitation, ionization, ion dissociation, neutralization and dissociation, as shown in Fig.3B. Macromolecules are very sensitive to minute chemical changes at the ap- propiate places which have great infl uence on the morphology. A single bond altered may convert a free fl owing polymer from a fl uid to an elastic solid. An even smaller change may be lethal in biological systems. The primary interactions of ionizing radiation with polymers include ionization, stabilization of electrons through generation of hot electrons, ion neutralization and free radicals formation. Free radicals are created either through chain scission or through the dissociation of the side chain (C–H(Cl)) bonds, as shown in Fig.4. The irradiation of polymers, natural or synthetic, with ionizing radiation leads to the formation of reactive intermediates, free radicals, ions and atoms and molecules in excited states. These intermediates can undergo several reac- tions such as hydrogen abstraction, rearrangements and formation of new bonds, addition to the double bonds, chain scission, oxidation and grafting recombina- tion (crosslinking and branching, to an extent which depends upon the polymer Fig.5. Secondary reactions in polymers occurring under irradiation (M – monomer). Fig.4. Primary processes occurring in polymer irradiation (P – polymer, R – radical). Ionization: P P+ + e– Excitation: P P* Thermal stabilization of electron: e → e–th Neutralization: P+ + e–th → P * Free radicals formation: P* → R1  + R2  Disproportionation: → R + H Hydrogen abstraction: R + P → RH + P Addition to the double bonds: RCH=CH2 + H  → RCH2CH2  Recombination (branching or/and crosslinking): Rm  + Rn  → Pm+n or/and Pn and Chain scission: Rm  → Rm+n  + Rn  Oxidation: R + O2 → ROO  ROO → ROOH, –C=O, –OH, –COOH Grafting: R + M → RM R + nM → RMn  124 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing structure), as shown in Fig.5. As a result both low molecular weight species and crosslinking occur with changes in molecular weight (decrease or increase, cor- respondingly). Both reactions can occur simultaneously, one of them being dominant depending on polymer structure, the presence of additives, the radiation dose and environmental conditions. Crosslinking dominates under vacuum, while chain scission may be a main reaction in presence of oxygen or air. As a conse- quence, radiolytic products from both a polymer and its additives are formed. As a rule, under the radiation effect on solid substances, the spatial distribution of radicals is non-uniform [5]. Sometimes it may present closely located radical pairs and/or agglomerations. Trapped radicals increase with irradiation dose. The fundamental processes related to these reactions include: • crosslinking – polymer chains are joined and a network is formed; • chain scission – the molecular weight of the polymer is reduced through chain scission; • oxidation – where the polymer molecules react with oxygen via peroxide radicals (oxidation and chain scission often occur simultaneously); • long-chain branching – polymer chains are joined but a three-dimensional network is not yet formed; • grafting – a new monomer is added onto the base polymer chain; • polymerization – can also be initiated when monomers are irradiated; • radiation curing (as in the case of coatings or composites) is a combination of polymerization and crosslinking. Different polymers have different responses to radiation, especially crosslinking vs. chain scissioning. The same polymer such as poly(tetrafl uoro- ethylene) can degrade by chain scission when T < Tm (melting temperature of 315°C) or it crosslinks when T > Tm. Frequently different reactions occur si- multaneously with predominance of some of them. 4. RADIATION YIELD To quantify the radiation chemical effects of ionizing radiation, the number of molecules transformed or produced when a certain the quantity of radiation energy is absorbed should be known. The G(X) value is a measure of the ra- diation-chemical yield. It was originally defi ned as the number of molecules n(X), produced, destroyed or changed by radiation (consumed) to the irradi- ated matter by the mean energy imparted, E, usually of 100 eV of absorbed energy, as in Eq. (3): (3)    n X G X E  Chapter 5 125 Hence, the unit of the G-value of the International System of Units (SI) is mol/J. In the earlier literature the G-values were always given in units mol- ecules/100 eV, but the new SI units will be used. (1 molecule/100 eV corre- sponds to 1.036 × 10–7 mol/J). In Table 1 lists the G-values for crosslinking, G(X), and chain scissioning, G(S), for some of the common polymeric materials irradiated at room temperature without oxygen. Materials with G(X) larger than G(S), the overall result is crosslinking, and whenever G(S) is larger than G(X), the overall result is deg- radation. Materials whose G(X) and G(S) values are both low are more resist- ant toward radiation. Radiation effects are remarkably sensitive to molecular structure. G(S) and G(X) values vary from 0.1 to 10, as shown in Table 1. The ratio between them determines the changes in average molecular weight of polymers, as illus- trated in Fig.6. The G(X) of polyethylene (PE) is about one order of magnitude larger than that of polystyrene (PS) which demonstrates that aromatic rings exert a protective radiation effect. Table 1. G-values for crosslinking and chain scission for some common polymers. Polymer Crosslinking G(X) Scission G(S) G(S):G(X) Low-density polyethylene 1.42 0.48 0.34 High-density polyethylene 0.96 0.19 0.20 Isotactic polypropylene 0.16-0.26 0.29-0.31 1.1-1.5 Atactic polypropylene 0.4-0.5 0.3-0.6 0.7-0.9 Poly(methyl methacrylate) < 0.50 1.1-1.7 > 2 Poly(tetrafl uoroethylene) 0.1-0.3 3.0-5.0 10 Natural rubber 1.3-3.5 0.1-0.2 0.14 Nylon-6 0.35-0.7 0.7 1.0 Nylon-6,6 0.5-0.9 0.7-2.4 1.4 Poly(vinyl acetate) 0.1-0.3 0.06 0.2 Poly(vinylidene fl uoride) 0.6-1.00 0.30-0.6 0.3 Poly(methyl acrylate) 0.45-0.52 0.08 0.15 Polystyrene 0.019-0.051 0.0094-0.019 0.4 Polybutadiene 5.3 0.53 0.10 Polyisobutylene 0.05-0.5 5 > 10 Butyl rubber < 0.5 2.9-3.7 > 6 126 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing G(X) and G(S) also depend on irradiation conditions, such as temperature and atmosphere. 5. RADIOLYSIS PRODUCTS Polymers used in medical devices and in primary packaging materials have been studied with respect to radiolysis products. Orthopedic implants and other medical devices that come into close contact with the human body are sterilized by either gas or high energy radiation. They are not free from the effect of ionizing radiation particularly if the process is performed in air. Food irradiation, sterilization of packaging materials for pharmaceutical or food products with ionizing irradiation can cause not only chemical and physical changes in polymer materials but also formation of some radiolysis products which can be solvent extractable or detectable by other techniques such as gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), spectroscopic methods, in surrounding media [6]. Some examples are given in Table 2. The products and their concentrations are characteristic for each polymeric material. The polyolefi n materials (polyethylene, PE, and poly- propylene, PP) show an increase in low volatile compounds after irradiation due to an oxidative decomposition of the polymer and of additives. PE pro- duces only traces of hydrocarbons, aldehydes, ketones, and carboxylic acids, which largely disappear within weeks. Other packaging materials, such as poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET), polyamide (PA), and polystyrene (PS), did not signifi cantly change their amount of solvent extractable compounds after irradiation with 25 to 44 kGy. PA-6 (nylon-6) yields pentanamide as the main Fig.6. Relation between average molecular weight of polymers, G(X) and G(S) and radiation dose. Chapter 5 127 Ta bl e 2. R ad io ly si s pr od uc ts o f p ol ym er s. N am e A bb re vi at io n R ad io ly si s pr od uc ts O bs er va tio n R ef . Po ly et hy le ne PE Pe ro xy ra di ca ls o n su rf ac e; c ha in s ci ss io n, h yd ro pe ro xi de s, ca rb on yl m os tly k et on es , c ar bo xy lic a ci ds , h yd ro ca rb on s (b ut an e to n on an e) , a ce tic a ci d, 2 -p en ta no ne , p en ta na l, oc ta ne , p ro pi on ic a ci d, 2 -h ex an on e or 3 -h ex an on e, h ex an al , an d he pt an al , b ut an oi c ac id , 2 -h ep ta no ne o r 3 -h ep ta no ne , al ky l b en ze ne s G am m a ir ra di at io n in a ir – 2 2 kG y [7 ] Po ly pr op yl en e PP H yd ro ge n, h yd ro pe ro xi de s, k et on es , a ld eh yd es , a lc oh ol s an d ca rb ox yl ic a ci ds . T he k et on es a re v er y im po rt an t i n PP , bu t t he c ar bo xy lic a ci ds a re th e m aj or p ro du ct s E le ct ro n be am ir ra di at io n – 5, 1 0, 25 k G y [8 ] Po ly (v in yl c hl or id e) PV C 2- et hy l- 1- he xa no l ( 10 0- 10 00 p pm ), oc ta ne , 1 -o ct en e, 2- oc te ne , 4 -o ct en e, a ce tic a ci d, 2 -e th yl he xy l e st er ; 1 -o ct an ol , he pt an e, 3 -m et hy lh ep ta ne , 3 -h ep ta no ne , 2 -e th yl cy cl oh ex an al , 4- oc ta no ne , u nd ec an e, p en ty lc yc lo pr op an e, 2 -e th yl he xa no ic ac id Tw o m on th s af te r i rr ad ia tio n w ith 22 .5 k G y. C om po un ds re su lts n ot on ly fr om p ol ym er s bu t a ls o fr om ad di tiv es [7 ] Po ly (v in yl a lc oh ol ) PV A L U ns at ur at ed b on ds a nd c ar bo ny l g ro up s oc cu r u nd er ir ra di at io n; o rg an ic a ci ds , a lc oh ol s G am m a ra di at io n at ro om te m pe ra tu re – 1 0 kG y [9 ] Po ly (v in yl a ce ta te ) PV A A ce tic a ci d, C O 2, C O , C H 4, H 2 G am m a ra di at io n at ro om te m pe ra tu re u nd er v ac uu m [1 0] E th yl en e- vi ny l ac et at e co po ly m er s E V A 10 2 ra di ol ys is c om po un ds , u ns at ur at ed h yd ro ca rb on s, ke to ne s, m et hy l d er iv at iv es G am m a ra di at io n at ro om te m pe ra tu re a nd in a ir p re se nc e E th yl en e- vi ny l al co ho l c op ol ym er E V O H A lk yl a ro m at ic s su ch a s te rt -b ut yl b en ze ne a nd is ob ut yl be nz en e, a nd o xy ge na te d ar om at ic s su ch a s ac et op he no ne an d 2- ph en yl is op ro pa no l; pr op an al , m et hy l e th yl k et on e, 2- bu ta no l, te rt -b ut yl b en ze ne , a nd 2 -m et hy lp ro py lb en ze ne E le ct ro n be am ir ra di at io n – 5- 50 k G y [1 1] Po ly st yr en e PS A ce to ph en on e (3 0- 50 p pm ); b en za ld eh yd e, p he no l, 1- ph en yl et ha no l ( < 10 p pm ), an d ph en yl ac et al de hy de G am m a ra di at io n in a ir – 2 5- 50 k G y [1 2] 128 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing N am e A bb re vi at io n R ad io ly si s pr od uc ts O bs er va tio n R ef . M et hy l m et ha cr yl at e- -a cr yl on itr ile - -b ut ad ie ne -s ty re ne M A B S B en za ld eh yd e, a ce to ph en on e, p he no l, 1- ph en yl et ha no l, 1- ph en yl -1 -p ro pa no ne G am m a ra di at io n – 22 .4 k G y [7 ] Po ly am id e PA -6 Pe nt an am id e (≈ 7 5 pp m ) a nd c ap ro la ct am ; t ra ce s of s om e ho m ol og ou s am id es G am m a ra di at io n in a ir – 2 5- 50 k G y [1 2] Po ly ur et ha ne PU R O O H , O H • , R O • , ca rb ox yl ic a ci ds , a lc oh ol s, e st er s, fo rm at s 25 -1 00 0 kG y, in a ir [1 3] Po ly (d im et hy ls ilo x) an e Si lic on e, PD M S C ro ss lin ki ng , c ha in s ci ss io n to s m al l e xt en t, hy dr og en m et ha ne , e th an e 50 k G y – no nc ito to xi ci ty [1 3] Po ly (e th yl en e te re ph th al at e) PE T Fo rm ic a ci d, a ce tic a ci d, 1 ,3 -d io xa la ne , 2- m et hy l- 1, 3- di ox ol an e; a ce ta ld eh yd e, 1 ,3 -d io xo la ne , 2- m et hy l- 1, 3- di ox ol an e; te re ph th al ic a ci d, bi s- (2 -h yd ro xy et hy l) te re ph th al at e, d im et hy l t er ep ht ha la te , m on oh yd ro xy et hy le ne te re ph th al at e G am m a ra di at io n – 5, 2 5 an d 50 k G y, at a m bi en t t em pe ra tu re o r a n el ec tr on be am a cc el er at or [1 4] Po ly sa cc ha ri de s H 2, C H 4, C O , C O 2 o r l ow m ol ec ul ar m as s su bs ta nc es s uc h as w at er , f or m al de hy de , m et ha no l, al de hy de s, k et on es , fo rm ic a ci d, a ce ta ld eh yd e, m et ha no l, ac et on e, e th an ol , m et hy l f or m at e an d su ga rs : g lu co se , m al to se , e ry th ro se , ri bo se , m an no se [1 5] Pr ot ei ns H en eg g- w hi te ly so zy m e Su lp hu r a nd c ar bo n- ce nt re d ra di ca ls R SS  , pe rt hi yl ra di ca ls , su lp hu r- ox yg en ra di ca ls (i n pr es en ce o f o xy ge n) G am m a ra di at io n – 0 to 2 0 kG y, in th e so lid s ta te (l yo ph ili ze d po w de r) , a t r oo m te m pe ra tu re u nd er th re e di ff er en t a tm os ph er es (a ir, ni tr og en a nd o xy ge n) [1 6] Ta bl e 2. C on td . Chapter 5 129 product, plus traces of some homologous amides. The poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) packaging material release of hydrochloric acid (HCl) during irradiation and large amounts of volatile substances were extracted from the PVC sheets. The main products of PVC and PP are fragments of additives, i.e. of stabilizers and phenol-type antioxidants, respectively. For consumer protection and also to meet general food packaging legislative requirements for irradiated packag- ing materials, it is necessary to evaluate the compositional changes in the poly- mers following irradiation, especially for irradiated polyolefi ns and PVC. Most attention should be paid to low volatile radiolysis products which are the most likely to migrate into a foodstuff or a pharmaceutical products. Under realistic polymer/food simulant contact conditions during irradiation, a large number of primary and secondary radiolysis products (hydrocarbons, aldehydes, ketones, alcohols, carboxylic acids) were produced. These compounds were detected in the food simulants after contact with all fi lms tested, even at the lower absorbed doses of 5 and 10 kGy (approved doses for food preservation). The type and concentration of radiolysis products increases progressively with increasing dose. Volatile and non-volatile compounds produced during irradiation affect- ed the sensory properties of potable water after contact with packaging fi lms. Taste transfer to water was observed mainly at higher doses and was more noticeable for multilayer structures containing recycled low density polyethyl- ene (LDPE) [17]. The main products of PS are acetophenone, benzaldehyde, phenol, 1-phenylethanol, and phenylacetaldehyde. Their concentrations are one order of magnitude below the residual styrene/styrene dimer levels [7, 18]. The radiolysis products formed during gamma-ray or electron beam ra- diation are generally later released. Due to rigid structure of these materials, the radiolysis products may be trapped inside the polymeric structure and be delivered later when the material enters into contact with environment that favours their release. The radiolysis products of some polyethylene irradiated at 20 kGy were evaluated 7.5 months after irradiation and it was found that the Fig.7. Variation of functional groups with radiation dose (A) and storage time of UHMWPE (B). BA H y d ro p e ro x id e ( m o l/ L ) Radiation dose (kGy) C o n c e n tr a ti o n ( m o l/ L ) Storage time (h) 130 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing peroxy radicals continued to react, promoting chain scissioning, and the gen- eration of carbonyl, of hydroperoxides and of ketones. In the radiation of ultra- -high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE), high concentrations and new radiolysis products were found, as shown in Fig.7. When exposed to 25 or 50 kGy radiation doses, PS produces radiolysis products such as benzaldehyde, acetophenone (30-50 ppm), 1-phenylethanol (< 10 ppm) and phenol. Nylons evolved pentanamide (75 ppm) and caprolactam. PP generates alkyl radicals which can subsequently interact with molecular oxygen to form hydroxyl, carbonyl or carboxyl groups. These volatiles can have adverse fl avour effects to irradiated food packaged in these polymers, in general in this order: LDPE > HDPE (high density polyethylene) > PS ~ PA and PET. The intensity of specifi c off-odors increases with the availability of oxygen in atmosphere. The addition of the antioxidants reduces the formation of carboxylic acid derivatives in LDPE fi lms. However, phenolic stabilizers, such as Irganox 1076, 1010 and 1330 and the arylphosphite antioxidant Irgafos 168 (in PVC, PE and PP) are susceptible to degradation under gamma irradiation. Low doses of ir- radiation (5 kGy) to HDPE trays can completely destruct phosphite antioxidants to their phosphate products with some covalently bonded on the polymer ma- trix so that they will not be found in simulants. At present, little is known about toxicity of radiolytic products from polymers and additives because of the variability of migration rates and because of the potential of polymeric entrap- ment of volatiles from the different polymers into food simulants [19]. 6. CHANGES IN PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES 6.1. SYNTHETIC POLYMERS Radiation is the unique source of energy which can initiate chemical reac- tions at any temperature, including ambient, under any pressure, in any phase (gas, liquid or solid), without use of catalysts [20]. Polymers are quite often irradiated for modifi cation or sterilization (medical products). Therefore, the changes in their structure may be benefi cial or undesirable. The application of radiation for modifi cation of synthetic materials, mostly curing and crosslink- ing is a well-established technology [21]. The changes in the properties of the irradiated polymers in the solid state are: • chemical changes: – crosslinking and chain scission, Chapter 5 131 – structural weakness, – gas formation, – double bond formation, – oxidation, – living radical effects after irradiation, – effects on additives; • physical changes: – changes in mechanical properties (mechanical strength, flexibility, Young’s moduli, torsional resistance, etc.), – colour change, – changes in conductivity, – changes in crystallinity, – thermal stability and transitions. Predominant main-chain scission (average molar mass decreases) Predominant crosslinking (average molar mass increases) Polymethacrylates Polyacrylates Polymethacrylamide Polyacrylamide Poly(α-methacrylonitrile) Polyacrylonitrile Poly(α-methylstyrene) Polystyrene Polyisobutene Polyethylene Poly(tetrafl uoroethylene) Polypropylene Poly(trifl uorochloroethylene) Polyisoprene Poly(vinyl fl uoride) Polybutadiene Poly(vinylidene chloride) Polyamides Poly(hexane-1-sulphone) Poly(vinyl acetate) Poly(propylene sulphide) Poly(vinyl alcohol) Poly(oxymethylene) Polyvinylpyrrolidone Polycarbonates Polyurethanes Poly(vinyl butyral) Polychloroprene Poly(phenyl vinyl ketone) Natural rubber Polysaccharides (cellulose, chitosan) Polysiloxanes Polysine, polyalanine Copolymers of butadiene with styrene or acrylonitrile Nucleic acids (DNA) Copolymers of acrylonitrile with styrene Table 3. Linear polymers that predominantly undergo crosslinking or main-chain scis- sioning if irradiated with high energy radiation at room temperature in vacuum or in an oxygen-free atmosphere. 132 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing The different responses to radiation for different polymers are related to the chemical structures of the polymers. Some examples of chemical structures that correspond to crosslinking types, degrading or scissioning types, and ra- diation-resistant polymers are given below. A classifi cation of common polymers is summarized in Table 3 and the structure of some are depicted in Fig.8. The formation of reactive oxygen species can result in the oxidation of poly- mer with the formation of peroxide, alcohol and carbonyl compounds. The most stable polymers are vinyl derivatives, PS and the PET with polyamides (nylons) having intermediary stability while polyolefi ns as the least stable polymers. In solid state, the radicals can be found for months after irradiation. Com- mercial polymers often contain some additives. The effect of the additives on radiolysis is important. Radiation protecting additives have aromatic cyclic structures and reduce degradation by radiation. Plasticizers can have a similar protective role. Mechanical properties of irradiated polymers depend on the ratio of chain scission and crosslinking and are related to molecular weight. The mechanical properties of polymers of the crosslinking type are improved upon irradiation with low absorbed doses (up to 0.1 MGy). The elastic modu- lus, tensile strength and hardness are increased, whereas the solubility is de- creased with increasing absorbed dose. At very high absorbed doses, these poly- mers become hard and brittle. The polymers of the degradation type undergo deterioration of their mechanical properties even at low absorbed doses. Low doses of 5 and 10 kGy had no effect on mechanical properties such as tensile strength, elongation at break and Young’s modulus. However, at 30 kGy, there was a decrease in tensile strength in HDPE, PP and a decrease in elongation at break of LDPE and a polyethylene ionomer. The mechanical properties of Fig.8. Examples of chemical structures of polymers with different responses to radia- tion. Chapter 5 133 neither an ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA) nor polystyrene were affected by ir- radiation. Important aromatic polymers such as polyimides and polyarylsulphones, as shown in Fig.9, are resistant to high energy radiation compared to nonaro- matic polymers. The mechanical and electrical properties of a poly(pyromellitimide) remain satisfactory in the presence of air up to absorbed dose of 100 MGy. Most aro- matic polymers proved to be radiation resistant only in the absence of oxygen. For example, the mechanical properties of polystyrene were not appreciable deteriorated when exposed in the absence of oxygen to the absorbed doses up to 10 MGy, but these properties decreased to 50% of their initial values at an absorbed dose of only 0.8 MGy in the presence of oxygen. Irradiation of pre- packaged meat and poultry should alter neither physicochemical properties of a packaging fi lm nor result in the transfer of components or residues from packaging material to contaminate the food in contact with the plastic fi lm. The irradiation of plastic fi lm results in a combination of chemical crosslinking and a consequent increase of tensile strength of the fi lm, or a fragmentation leading to a decreased strength and increased permeability of packaging fi lms. In ad- dition to these events, the formation of volatile radiolysis products (hydrogen, methane, HCl, etc.) is infl uenced by presence of oxygen in the irradiated prod- ucts. It was reported that irradiation at 5, 10 and 30 kGy had no effect on the O2, CO2 permeability or water vapour transmission rates of a variety of polymers including LDPE, HDPE, PS, EVA, biaxially oriented PP and an ionomer. Colour change can appear when the double bonds formed on irradiated poly- mers such as poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and PVC. Conductivity change can increase when the double bond increased in irradi- ated polymers. The overall migration into food simulants as distilled water was not affected by low irradiation doses; at 30 kGy, migration into 3% acetic acid was decreased for PP and an ionomer. Fig.9. General chemical structure of polyimide and polysulphone. 134 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing 6.2. NATURAL POLYMERS Studies of the radiolysis of biopolymers [22] serve the dual purposes of giving information on: (1) the chemical mechanisms by which radiation modifi es life processes and (2) the structure-properties-application relationships in macromolecules. Irradiation effects on biopolymers result in the cleavage of chemical bonds. Because of the very complex composition of most biopoly- mers, many different chemical reactions are initiated and in each case a host of products are formed under the infl uence of high energy radiation. A variety of biopolymers composed of linear strands, including certain polysaccharides, proteins and nucleic acids undergo predominantly main-chain scission, and this is of outstanding importance in the case of deoxyribonucleic acids (DNA), because the killing of living cells correlates well with double-strand breaks. 6.2.1. Amino acids, proteins and DNA Amino acids and proteins exist as zwitterions. Under irradiation amino acids undergo by the electron capture deamination, as indicated in Fig.10A. With proteins both deamination and decarboxylation take place. For those molecules containing sulphur groups, they are cleaved by a radiolytic mecha- nism and hydrogen sulphide is produced as a by-product, as shown in Fig.10B. In living cells, both direct and indirect depositions of energy are possible. Direct effects in chromatin components result in the formation of specifi c radical products, many of which are highly reactive. Secondary reactions of the cationic radicals are largely unknown. Indirect effects occur when energy is deposited in water or other components in a solution, and radiolysis products such as e–aq and •OH react with the biopolymer have been investigated, as shown in Fig.11. Commonly DNA molecules are tightly associated with 8 to 12 water mol- ecules per nucleotide forming a primary solvation shell which increases the radiation-induced damage to DNA by ~50%. When the water molecules are ionized, an entire transfer to DNA can occur and electrons ejected from water molecules can be scavenged by DNA molecules. The events due to the direct effect are single- and double-strand breaks, crosslinking, base release, and le- sions in bases and sugar moieties. Hydrogen bonds between the two strands of the double helix are broken. A large number of radiolysis products results. From base damage the following products have been identifi ed: 5-hydroxy-5,6-di- hydrothymine, 5,6-dihydrothymine, 5-hydroxyuracil, 5,6-dihydroxyuracil, 5-hydroxycytosine, 2-hydroxyadenine, 8-hydroxyadenine, 7-hydro-8-oxo- -guanine, 2,6-diamino-4-oxo-5-formamidopyrimidine, 4,6-diamino-5-forma- midopyrimidine. Studies carried out half a century ago showed that this process is effective in inactivating enzymes. Replacing •OH to the less reactive inorganic radical anion •Br2 – has been done. It is then possible to determine the role of tyrosine Chapter 5 135 Fig.10. Radiolytic mechanism of amino acids (A) and proteins (B). R-CH-C-O- NH3+ O + e- R-CH-C-O- + NH3 O PROTEINS AMINOACIDS (A) H2N-CH-N-C-C-N-CH-C(=O)O - O R R H R RH abstraction and valence migration O R H R H R H2N-CH-N-C-CH-N-CH-C(=O)O - eaq - R H R H R H2N-CH-N-C-CH-N-CH-C(=O)O - O- Charge migration toward chain ends desamination decarboxylation NH3 + CH R -NH- + CH-C(=O)O- -NH2 R H+ R-S-S-R (R-S-S-R)- R-S + R-S- H+ R-SH eaq - R-S-H eaq - R + SH H + H2S (B) 136 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing in functional and structural integrity of several proteinase inhibitors. Both e–aq and –OR react rapidly with DNA, but only •OH initiates reactions which dam- age DNA. Radiolysis of double-stranded DNA leads to an increase in optical absorption. The •OH is believed to attack the deoxyribose moiety, causing strand Fig.12. Schematic representation of phenomena launched by ionizing radiations in biological molecules/organisms. Fig.11. Radiolytic mechanism of DNA. Direct effect: DNA radiation  DNA+ + e– + DNA* Indirect effect: H2O radiation  H2O + + e– H2O + DNA → H2O + DNA + e– + DNA → DNA– Chapter 5 137 breaks and partial denaturation, thus reducing the hypochromic effect. After the DNA is partially denatured, or single-stranded, •OH attacks the bases also. Three kinds of strand breaks have been observed: (i) immediate, (ii) those appearing post irradiation, and (iii) those appearing on post-irradiation treatment with alkali. Radiolysis of chromatin results in DNA strand breaks, base damage, and protein-DNA crosslinks. Yields for strand breaks and base damage are lower in chromatin than in purifi ed DNA, and lower still in intact cells [23]. In living organisms, this denaturation of the biological molecules without adequate protection over a long period of exposure could have deleterious ef- fects on health, as illustrated in Fig.12. 6.2.2. Polysaccharides Irradiation of polysaccharides in the solid state induces the radical forma- tion in molecular chains as a result of the direct action of radiation [24]. Here mainly two events take place: (1) direct energy transfers to the macromolecule to produce macroradicals and (2) the generation of primary radicals due to the presence of water (moisture). The course of the degradation of carbohydrates in the solid state is illustrated in Fig.13. The main effects are fragmentation, hydrolysis and rearrangement leading to low molecular weight products. When polysaccharides such as starch, cellulose, chitosan, amylose and dextran are subjected to high energy radiation, a vast number of products is formed, such Fig.13. Events in solid state radiation of carbohydrates. OO O CH2OH OH OH OH CH2OH OH OH OH O O CH2OH OH OH OH O CH2OH OH OH OH OH O OH OH CH2OH OH OHO CH2OH H OH OH OH OO O CH2OH OH OH OH CH2OH OH OH OH C OH OH OH CH2OH O OH Hydrolysis Rearrangement Fragmentation RH RH*, RH+, e- R + H -ray 138 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing as gaseous H2, CH4, CO, CO2 and low molecular mass substances such as water, formaldehyde, methanol, aldehydes, ketones and sugars. The remaining polymer contains carbonyl, carboxyl, and aldehyde groups. The average mol- ecular molar mass is reduced because of the predominant main-chain scission- ing through cleavage of the C–O–C glycoside bond between base units. When high energy radiation is directly absorbed by polysaccharides, electronically excited moieties, radical cations and electron are generated. Free radical pro- cesses play an important role, while the radical cations generated are rapidly transformed to free radicals by deprotonation. During the solid state radiolysis of polysaccharides, scissioning of the glycosidic bond, analogous to the reactions shown in Fig.13, is the dominant process which eventually leads to a decrease in the molecular weight of the macromolecules. Degradation and the resulting changes in average molecular weight products are often quantifi ed as radiation yields of degradation G(s). Moisture content strongly infl uences the reaction pathways and yields. The radiolysis of water contributes to this. The yields of radicals are signifi cantly higher than in dry polysaccharide so the contribution of indirect effect may be greater than based on percent of moisture, and also due to the effect of water molecules on the dry matrix structure and polymer chain mobility [25]. 6.3. COMPLEX MATERIALS Complex materials, including multilayer laminated and coextruded ones, are very useful because they combine a number of desirable properties which no single of material possesses. Most are based on polyolefi n, PS, PET, PA, EVA, and other synthetic or natural polymers. The effect of gamma irradiation Fig.14. Variation of (A) hydroxyl and (B) carbonyl indexes of gamma-irradiated PP and PP/biomass composites compared with those of 7 weeks fungal degradation of the PP/biomass samples. (Adapted from Ref. [26]). A B Chapter 5 139 on PP biocomposites (Eucalyptus globulus, pine cones, and Brassica rapa) has been studied by Parparita et al. [26]. The biomass lignin content acts as an antioxidant and has a stabilization effect against gamma irradiation degradation. For the materials studied, gamma irradiation promoted the biodegradability under the action of the Bjerkandera adusta fungus [27]. Removing a protective layer of relatively inert polyolefi n, increased the effects of absorbed dose which leads to increase of oxygen containing functional groups, as illustrated in Fig.14. In this manner, an eco-friendly method for improving integration of some “undegradable” materials in natural cycles could be improved. () 7. RADIATION PROTECTION Measures to fully protect polymers against radiation exposure do not exist. The stabilization of polymeric materials against high energy radiation may be achieved through the use of antioxidants, ultraviolet and heat stabilizers, which, in turn, also undergo degradation. Radiolysis products could originate more from additive decomposition than from the originating polymers themselves. Protective agents added to the polymers in small amounts are effective only to a limited extent and function via different mechanisms. They can act main- ly as antioxidants by preventing radiation-induced oxidative chain reactions or more generally as free radicals scavengers. Other additives may act as energy absorbers in accepting electronic excitation energy transferred from a polymer. In this manner, agents that operate protectively are aromatic compounds, in- cluding polymers with aromatic constituents or fi llers (inorganic materials or carbon black). Electronic excitation energy transported to or directly absorbed by aromatic rings is delocalized due to the π-electron-based resonant structure of the aromatic ring, and thus converted to heat by collision with neighbouring groups or molecules. Hence, bond rupture is much less likely in the case on nonaromatic compounds. 8. CONCLUSIONS Study of the radiation chemistry of solid organic materials is important for many applications, as in the medical, pharmaceutical, and food preservation fi elds because the effects of radiation exposure can be benefi cial or deleterious. Limits should be based on known effects. Much greater effort is needed in this direction. 140 Applications of ionizing radiation in materials processing Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge the fi nancial support given by Erasmus+ Programme through research project 2014-1-PL01-KA203-003611 and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) through the research project 17689R1. REFERENCES [1]. Willard, J.E. (1987). Radiation chemistry of organic solids. In Farhataziz & M.A.J. Rogers (Eds.), Radiation chemistry. Principles and applications (pp. 395-434). New York: VCH Publishers. [2]. Kempner, E.S. (2011). Direct effects of ionizing radiation on macromolecules. J. Polym. Sci. Part B. Polym. Phys., 49(12), 827-831. DOI: 10.1002/polb.22250. [3]. Nelson, G., & Reilly, D. (1991). Gamma-ray interactions with matter. In D. Reilly, N. Ensslin, H. Smith, Jr. & S. Kreiner (Eds.), Passive nondestructive analysis of nuclear materials (pp. 27-42). U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. (NUREG/CR-5550, LA-UR-90-732). [4]. Willett, E. (2005). The basics of quantum physics: Understanding the photoelec- tric effect and line spectra. New York: The Rosen Publishing Group. [5]. Grigoriev, E.I., & Trakhtenber, L.I. (1996). Primary chemical processes in the irradiated solid. In E.I. Grigoriev & L.I. Trakhtenberg (Eds.), Radiation-chemi- cal processes in solid phase: Theory and application (pp. 37-48). CRC Press. [6]. Demertzis, P.G., Franz, R., & Welle, F. (1999). The effects of γ-irradiation on compositional changes in plastic packaging fi lms. Packag. Technol. Sci., 12(3), 119-130. DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1099-1522(199905/06)12:3<119::AID-PTS460> 3.0.CO;2-G. [7]. Buchalla, R., Boess, C., & Bögl, K.W. (1999). Characterization of volatile ra- diolysis products in radiation-sterilized plastics by thermal desorption-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry: screening of six medical polymers. Radiat. Phys. Chem., 56, 353-367. DOI: 10.1016/S0969-806X(99)00311-4. [8]. De Rojas Gante, C., & Pascat, B. (1990). Effects of B-ionizing radiation on the properties of fl exible packaging materials. Packag. Technol. Sci., 3, 97-115. DOI: 10.1002/pts.2770030207. [9]. Lü, G., Chen, H., & Liu, D. (1993). The degradation in solid state of polyvinyl alcohol by gamma-irradiation. Radiat. Phys. Chem., 42(1-3), 229-232. DOI: 10.1016/0969-806X(93)90240-U. [10]. Geuskens, G., Borsu, M., & David, C. (1972). Photolysis and radiolysis of poly- vinylacetate-II: Volatile products and absorption spectra. Eur. Polym. J., 8(7), 883-892. DOI: 10.1016/0014-3057(72)90048-1. [11]. Komolprasert, V. (2007). Packaging for foods treated by ionizing radiation. Chap- ter 6. In J.H. Han (Ed.), Packaging for nonthermal processing of food (pp. 87-116). Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd. DOI: 10.1002/9780470277720.ch6. [12]. Buchalla, R., Begley, T.H., & Morehouse, K.M. (2002). Analysis of low-mol- ecular weight radiolysis products in extracts of gamma-irradiated polymers by Chapter 5 141 gas chromatography and high-performance liquid chromatography. Radiat. Phys. Chem., 63, 837-840. DOI: 10.1016/S0969-806X(01)00642-9. [13]. Bohrer, D. (2012). Contamination from sterilization procedures. In D. Bohrer (Ed.), Sources of contamination in medicinal products and medical devices (pp. 433-511). Wiley. [14]. Komolprasert, V., McNeal, T.P., & Begley, T.H. (2003). Effects of gamma- and electron-beam irradiation on semi-rigid amorphous polyethylene terephthalate co- polymers. Food. Addit. Contam., 20(5), 505-517. DOI: 10.1080/0265203031000070119. [15]. Sokhey, A.S., & Hanna, M.A. (1993). Properties of irradiated starches. Food Struct., 12(4), 397-410. Retrieved March 30, 2016, from http://digitalcommons. usu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1329&context=foodmicrostructure. [16]. Baumeister, W., Fringeli, U.P., Hahn, M., & Seredynski, J. (1976). Radiation dam- age of proteins in the solid state: Changes of β-lactoglobulin secondary structure. BBA – Protein Struct., 453(1), 289-292. DOI: 10.1016/0005-2795(76)90276-2. [17]. Chytiri, S., Goulas, A.E., Badeka, A., Riganakos, K.A., & Kontominas, M.G. (2005). Volatile and non-volatile radiolysis products in irradiated multilayer coextruded food-packaging fi lms containing a buried layer of recycled low- -density polyethylene. Food. Addit. Contam., 22(12), 1264-1273. DOI: 10.1080/ 02652030500241645. [18]. Bohrer, D. (2013). Sources of contamination in medicinal products and medical devices. New Jersey: Wiley. [19]. Hui, Y.H. (2006). Handbook of food science, technology, and engineering. Boca Raton: CRC Taylor and Francis. [20]. Rao, V. (2012). Radiation processing of polymer. In S. Thomas & W. Yang (Eds.), Advances in polymer processing: From macro- to nano- scales (pp. 402-437). Woodhead Publishing Limited and CRC Press. [21]. Drobny, J.G. (2003). Radiation technology for polymers. Boca Raton: CRC Press. [22]. Schnabel, W. (2014). Polymers and electromagnetic radiation: Fundamentals and practical applications. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH. [23]. Myers Jr., L.S., & Kay, E. (1979). Radiolysis of DNA and other biopolymers. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys., 5(7), 1055-1060. DOI: 10.1016/0360-3016(79)90619-9. [24]. IAEA. (2004). Radiation modifi cation of polysaccharides. Vienna: IAEA. (IAEA- -TECDOC-1422). Retrieved November 6, 2015, from http://www-pub.iaea.org/ MTCD/publications/PDF/te_1422_web.pdf. [25]. IAEA. (2010). Report of the 2nd RCM on “Development of radiation-processed products of natural polymers for application in agriculture, healthcare, industry and environment”, Reims, France, 12-16 October 2009. Working material. Vienna: IAEA. Retrieved March 16, 2016, from http://www-naweb.iaea.org/ napc/iachem/meetings/RCMs/RC-1091-2_report_complete.pdf. [26]. Parparita, E., Zaharescu, T., Darie, R.N., & Vasile, C. (2015). Biomass effect on γ-irradiation behavior of some polypropylene biocomposites. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 54(8), 2404-2413. DOI: 10.1021/ie5043984. [27]. Butnaru, E., Darie-Niţă, R.N., Zaharescu, T., Balaeş, T., Tănase, C., Hitruc, G., Doroftei, F., & Vasile, C. (2016). Gamma irradiation assisted fungal degradation of the polypropylene/biomass composites. Radiat. Phys. Chem., 125, 134-144. DOI: 10.1016/j.radphyschem.2016.04.003.